The Project Gutenberg eBook of Highways and Highway Transportation, by
George R. Chatburn

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: Highways and Highway Transportation

Author: George R. Chatburn

Release Date: October 6, 2021 [eBook #66482]

Language: English


Produced by: Charlene Taylor, Harry Lamé and the Online Distributed
             Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This file was
             produced from images generously made available by The Internet
             Archive/American Libraries.)

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HIGHWAYS AND HIGHWAY
TRANSPORTATION ***


  Please see the Transcriber’s Notes at the end of this text.

  Elements printed in italics or in boldface have been transcribed
  between _underscores_ and =equal signs= respectively. Small capitals
  have been replaced with ALL CAPITALS. Superscript and subscribt texts
  have been transcribed as ^{text} and _{text}. Some formulas contain
  italic letters followed by subscript indices; these will show two
  underscores, as in _T__{a}.





  HIGHWAYS
  AND
  HIGHWAY TRANSPORTATION


[Illustration:

  © _Major Hamilton Maxwell_
  © _Underwood and Underwood_

STORM KING HIGHWAY

A Great Engineering Project Along the Hudson between Cornwall and West
Point, N. Y.]




  HIGHWAYS
  AND
  HIGHWAY TRANSPORTATION

  BY

  GEORGE R. CHATBURN, A.M., C.E.

  _Professor of Applied Mechanics and Machine Design
  Lecturer on Highway Engineering
  The University of Nebraska_

  NEW YORK
  THOMAS Y. CROWELL COMPANY
  PUBLISHERS




  COPYRIGHT 1923, BY
  THOMAS Y. CROWELL COMPANY

  _Printed in the United States of America_




PREFACE


The following pages on Highways and Highway Transportation do not
pretend to be an exhaustive treatise on the subject, but rather a
glimpse of the vast development of the humble road and its office as
an agency for transportation. Possibly the grandeur of the mountains
is best appreciated by one who lives among them, who climbs their
acclivitous heights, who daily experiences their power and majesty,
and measures their magnitude by grim muscular exertion. But, even
so, it would be foolish to contend that he who gets his information
from the seat of a Pullman car receives no benefit from the hasty
glimpse, or, that his imagination is not quickened and cultured by
the experience. In writing this book, then, I have had constantly in
mind the myriads of people who have not the time, and possibly not the
facilities, to search the pages of the literature of the past for the
origin and development, or to work out their present importance, of
our amplification of roads and of road uses. It is felt that many of
these people laudably desire a conversational knowledge of the origin,
evolution and present status of highway transportation, even though it
be glimpsed by a very rapid passage through a very large subject.

The primary objects have therefore been, to sketch briefly and simply
the development of the transportation systems of the United States,
to indicate their importance and mutual relations, to present some
practical methods used in the operation of highway transport and to
make occasional suggestions for the betterment of the road as a usable
machine for the benefit and pleasure of mankind.

Any observations made or conclusions drawn are purely personal. I
entered into and have carried on the work entirely unbiased. I am
not financially or otherwise, except academically, interested in
any firm or company whose business has to do with transportation
either directly as a carrier, or indirectly as a manufacturer of the
instruments or accessories to transportation, nor does any of my living
come from societies or foundations organized as propagandists for any
particular forms of transportation, or transportation materials or
equipment. I have no admiration for the man who hopes to see the steam
and electric railways put out of business or even caused to run at a
loss by the automobile, motor express or motor bus. Neither have I
any plaudits for the man who would arrest the growth of the new forms
of transportation by drastic legal enactments and excessive taxation
in order to preserve the old. I believe there is room and need in the
United States for all forms of transportation, and that each can thrive
in its respective field just as do wheat and corn but none will thrive
if they attempt to occupy the same field at the same time.

The text is naturally divided into two parts--the development of
highways and their use. The first part treats of the relation of
transportation to civilization generally, explaining briefly how the
two have grown together like children at school, how each has helped
the other, and how the meter of one is the measure of the other.

Leaving the old world there is sketched all too briefly the development
in the United States of transportation facilities from the coastal and
natural waterways, from the pack and trail, used by the aborigine and
early settlers, through the treks of the pioneers, the periods of canal
digging, the toll road competition, and the railway frenzy, to the
advent of the modern road with the coming of the bicycle and automobile
and their wonderful accelerative impulse.

The effects of State and Federal aid upon the road conditions of the
country are fully treated as is also the planning of highway systems.

Automotive transportation for business and pleasure including rural
motor express and bus lines, and their effect on production and
marketing are described and discussed.

In the chapters on highway accidents and highway aids to traffic,
attention is called to many types of accidents, including railway
crossing accidents, with suggestions for their mitigation. Here also
are given the most recent practical rules for the regulation of traffic
in both city and country.

A chapter is devoted to the esthetics of the highway, a subject just
coming to the attention of road men who have heretofore been mostly
concerned with distances, grades, widths and surfaces, which, by
the way, are frequently mentioned in the text. As in all building
construction the first appeal was made to material things and their
relation to the pocket-book, while the last and most enduring appeal is
spiritualistic and is made to the pleasures of the imagination.

The same idea of making the road a means of catering to the
preservative and pleasure instincts of man is considered in the final
chapter on aids and attractions to traffic and travel. Safety and
warning devices are discussed as such, while comforts and conveniences
are means for luring the average citizen to the highway, to the camps
and parks, for the broadening effect upon his character, the health of
his body, and the enlightenment of his soul.

Thus we close a most hurried journey from the very beginning of roads
to their modern far superior yet very imperfect attainments. The main
thought throughout has been the road as a usable agency in the economic
and entertaining phases of life. Each equally important to the wealth,
health, and happiness of our people. The mind easily travels ahead to
a time when separate roads will be devoted to the two great ends of
business and pleasure. Then the flight of fancy passes on to still
another period of time and sees the highways made inoperative and
superfluous, overgrown by weeds and grass, for the argosies of business
and pleasure have taken to the air.

  GEORGE RICHARD CHATBURN.

  LINCOLN, NEBRASKA
  March 9, 1923.




CONTENTS


  CHAPTER I

                                                                    PAGE

  TRANSPORTATION A MEASURE OF CIVILIZATION                             1

  Stages of Civilization: Direct Appropriation; Pastoral;
  Agricultural -- Manorial and Feudal Systems; Handicraft --
  Merchant Guilds, Effect upon Trade, Domestic System, Government
  Control, Agriculture; Industrial -- Building of Canals,
  Smelting Iron, Invention of Steam Engine, Railways Developed.
  Some Historical Roads and their Influence: Early Highways --
  Asiatic, Greek, Roman, Pre-Historic American.


  CHAPTER II

  TRANSPORTATION DEVELOPMENT IN THE UNITED STATES: EARLY TRAILS AND
  ROADS                                                               34

  First Settlements near Coast. Birch Bark Canoe, Meagerness of
  Roads. Settlement follows Waterways. Portages. Lines of Travel
  -- Through Alleghanies, from the North, Boone’s Trace or the
  Wilderness Road, Calk’s Diary. Explorations -- Marquette, Lewis
  and Clark, Fur Companies. Western Trails -- Oregon, Salt Lake,
  Later California, Santa Fé, Gila and Spanish. Turnpike Roads,
  Wagon Road Neglect, National Participation -- Cumberland Road.
  Early Inns.


  CHAPTER III

  WATERWAYS AND CANALS                                                70

  Coastal, Inlets, Rivers, Creeks. Canals -- Europe, New York,
  Pennsylvania, Ohio, Other States; Passenger Traffic on;
  Prosperity and Desuetude. Ship Canals: Sault Ste. Marie,
  Cape Cod, Panama -- Inducements for, Early Schemes, Routes
  -- Tehauntepec, Nicaragua, Others; French Participation --
  DeLesseps’ Grant, Company Organized; Other Promotion Schemes;
  Indignation in the United States against Foreign Building
  Canal; DeLesseps begins Work; Clayton-Bulwer Treaty; Hay and
  Pauncefote Treaty; Commission Reports Favorably on Nicaraguan
  Route; French Company Bankrupt; Colombian Congress Refuses
  to Sell to the United States Control of the Canal Strip;
  Panamanian Revolution -- Roosevelt’s Part in Revolution;
  United States Secures Control of Canal Strip, Colombia
  Protests; Construction of Canal Begun; Description of Canal,
  Canal Traffic. River Transportation: Small Boats, Pole Boats,
  Large Boats, Rafts. Steamboat: Construction, Mississippi
  River Traffic, New Orleans Levee, Mississippi Steamboats and
  Steamboating; Steamboat Fares. Government Attitude toward
  River Improvement. John Fitch Granted a Right in New Jersey;
  Calhoun’s Activities, Monroe’s Attitude. National Aid for
  Internal Improvements.


  CHAPTER IV

  RAILROADS                                                           99

  Origin and Early Development. Optimism of Promoters. Early
  Locomotives. First Chartered Railroad -- Charleston and
  Hamburg, First Passenger Car on Baltimore and Ohio, New
  York Central, Camden and Amboy, New England Roads, West of
  Alleghanies, in the South. Rapid Growth in Railway Mileage.
  Call for Government Aid. Land Grants. Pacific Roads --
  Congressional Discussion, Compromise Bills, Construction of
  Pacific Roads, Crédit Mobilier. Era of Railway Consolidation --
  Typical Consolidations, Methods of Consolidating. Mechanical
  Development: Rails, Freight Cars, Locomotives, Gauge,
  Telegraph, Signals. The Evolution of the Sleeping Car. Street
  Car Service. Electric Traction -- Origin, Development.


  CHAPTER V

  THE MODERN WAGON ROAD                                              126

  Neglect and Desuetude of Wagon Roads, 1830-1890. Laying out and
  Working Roads, Statutory Width of Roads. Influence of Bicycle
  for Better Roads: Origin of Bicycle, Development, Ordinary,
  Safety, Cycling Boom, Organization of Wheel Clubs, Propaganda
  for Good Roads, Prevalence of Poor Roads, Comments by Writers.
  Good Roads Associations; League of American Wheelmen,
  National Highway Commission, Col. Pope’s Propaganda, Bills
  Introduced in Congress. Office of Public Roads Inquiry: Duties
  and Limitations, Cooperation with Good Roads Organizations,
  National Good Roads Association -- Good Roads Trains, Object
  Lesson Roads, Policy Discontinued, Duties and Scope of Office
  of Public Roads Widened and Name Changed -- Educational Work,
  Research, Administration of Federal Aid. Rural Free Delivery
  of Mail: Origin, Development, Advantages. State Aid: Origin
  -- New Jersey, Salient Features, Difficulties of Getting it
  Enacted; Massachusetts; Other States; State Bonds for State
  Aid. Federal Aid; Enactment of Law, Provisions, Appropriation,
  Administration, Additional Appropriations.


  CHAPTER VI

  INTERRELATION BETWEEN HIGHWAY AND OTHER KINDS OF TRANSPORTATION    159

  Classification of Transportation. Railroads have not always
  Acted Honorably. Quantity Production and Division of Labor
  Applied to Railway Transportation, to Motor Transport.
  Automobiles Cutting into Railway Earnings, Babson’s Prediction.
  Effect of Motor Competition on Interurban Trolley Lines, on
  Street Car Lines, Taxicabs and Jitneys, Buses, Trackless
  Trolleys. Guaranteeing Earnings of Street Car Companies,
  Legitimate Fields of Transportation Agencies. Length of Haul
  for Economic Trucking. Reduction of Rates and Expenses. Carving
  out New Fields. Still Room for all Kinds of Transportation.


  CHAPTER VII

  AUTOMOTIVE TRANSPORTATION                                          181

  Defined, Radical Changes to be Expected. Business Passenger
  Traffic: Jitney and Taxicab, Motor Bus -- Qualifications,
  Fares, Competition with Street Cars, Cross-country Service,
  Carriers of School Children, Transfer between Depots. Pleasure
  Passenger Traffic: An Influence in the Purchase of Automobiles,
  Pleasurable Effect of Automobile Riding, Recreational and
  Pathological Benefits of Motoring, Cost of Motoring. Freight
  Traffic: Cost and Time Factors, Motor Trucks and Congested
  Districts, Time Devoted to Loading and Unloading, Depots,
  Warehouses, Devices, Removable Bodies, Sectional Containers,
  Store to Door Delivery, Mass Loading. Devices Connected with
  the Truck. Devices Separate, Special Types of Bodies. Traffic
  between Towns: Economic Distance, Licenses and Insurance,
  State Regulation without Competition, Development of State
  Regulation. Motor Bus Traffic: Buses, Rates, Future of Motor
  Bus and Other Types of Transportation. To and from the Farm:
  Importance of Farm Trucking, Arguments in Favor of, Cost of
  Trucking, Diversified Farming, Intensive Farming, Live Stock.
  Trucking, Benefits to the Farmer, Economy of Farm Trucking,
  Parcel Post Service and the Farm, Rural Express, Milk Trucks,
  Convenience to the Farmer, Purchasing a Truck. Terminal
  Facilities: Advantages. Social Aspect of Motor Transportation:
  Effect on Merchandising, Housing, Unification of Society,
  Standard of Living, Size of Farms, Salesmen, Hotels, City and
  Country Stores. Consolidated Rural Schools: The Public School
  and Patriotism, Peace, Changing Concepts of Public Schools.
  Rural Mail Delivery. Automobile and Health: As a Form of
  Exercise, Effect on Styles; Medical Science; Sanitary Effects
  -- Mosquitoes, Flies. The Automobile and Crime: Bootlegging,
  Robbery, Vandalism. Types of Automobile Transportation.


  CHAPTER VIII

  PLANNING HIGHWAY SYSTEMS: SELECTION OF ROAD TYPES                  222

  Object of a Road. Road Classification: Agricultural.
  Recreational, Commercial, Military. Problem of the Road
  Planner: Economy, Accommodation, Utilizing Existing Roads.
  Essentials to be Considered: Ruling Points, Branch Lines and
  Detours, Alternate Routes, Existing Highways and City Streets,
  Vested Rights, Widening Roads and Streets, Railroads, Trolley
  Lines, etc., Bridges, Culverts, Drainage, etc., Ruling Grades,
  Esthetics. Motor Transport Efficiency Outline, Highway System
  Unit: Arguments in Favor of National System -- Eliminates
  Sectional Differences, Gives Continuous Roads, Military Roads,
  Benefits of Example. State Systems -- Benefits. Procedure of
  Laying out a Road System: Commission, Determining Factors,
  Maps, Tentative System, Reconnaisance Survey -- What Shown,
  How Taken, Instruments; Hearings -- Object; Final Location
  -- Considerations, Traffic Census Advisable. Financial
  Considerations: First Cost, Upkeep, Traffic Census: Affects
  Location, Type of Road, Grades, Width, Foundations. Making a
  Traffic Census: Variation of Traffic -- Number of Counting
  Days, Hours Each Day, Weights, Observer’s Cards, Both Way
  Count, Weather, Stations -- Location of. Classification
  of Traffic: Object, Maximum Loads, Effect of Heavy Loads,
  Influence Units of Traffic -- British, French, Other Countries,
  Maryland, Massachusetts, Borough of Brooklyn; Suggested Form
  of Traffic Sheet -- New Jersey. Destructive Factors: Density
  of Traffic, Weight of Vehicles, Impact, Speed, Wrinkling,
  Sprung and Unsprung Weight, Tires, Pleasure Cars and Light
  Traffic to be Considered. Other Methods of Estimating the
  Amount of Traffic: Area Served, Tonnage Arising. Distribution
  of Traffic over Township Roads. Selection of a Suitable Type of
  Road. Taxpayers Allowed to Assist in Selection, Engineers to
  Suggest. Ideal Road: Qualities of -- Low First Cost, Durability
  -- Materials and Design, Resistance to Traction and Tractive
  Force -- Horse, Truck, Speed, Temperature, Roughness, Width
  of Tire, Diameter of Wheel, Table of Resistances; Resistance
  Due to Grade -- Formulas, Coefficient, Available Engine
  Effort; Slipperiness -- Type of Pavement, Climatic Conditions;
  Sanitariness -- Definition, Effect of Type of Road; Noisiness;
  Acceptability. Some Types of Roads and their Qualities: Earth,
  Sand-clay, Gravel, Macadam, Bituminous Macadam, Bituminous
  Concrete, Brick, Concrete, Creosoted Wood Block, Asphalt Block,
  Sheet Asphalt, Other Types. Comparison of Roads -- Specimen
  Tables.


  CHAPTER IX

  EFFECT OF EASE AND COST OF TRANSPORTATION ON PRODUCTION AND
  MARKETING                                                          273

  Production Defined, Productive Activities -- Change of Form,
  Change of Place, Change of Time. Nature and Labor. Capital
  -- Stored up Labor. Marketing -- Wholesaling and Retailing.
  Grain Exchanges; Defined, Object, Commission Merchant, Dealing
  in Futures -- Hedging. Cooperative Marketing: Advantages.
  Local Grain Merchant -- Financing Movement of Crops. Elements
  Entering into the Cost of Marketing. Transportation from Farm
  to Local Market. Cost of Production, Effect of Good Roads upon,
  Intensive Farming, Fruit Farming, Long Haul Transportation.
  Stock Marketing: Changing Character of Stock Raising, Distance
  of Economic Hauling by Team and by Truck, Effect of Truck
  Hauling on Number of Hogs Marketed. Seasonal Effect. Stock
  Merchant -- Local, Shrinkage, Dairying. Poultry. Forestry:
  Logging and Lumbering, Forest Management, Use of Truck and
  Trailer, At Saw Mill, Log Loader, in Lumber Yards, Mining.
  Factory Products. From Factory to Retailer. Terminal Charges
  Eliminated. Construction.


  CHAPTER X

  FINANCING HIGHWAYS AND HIGHWAY TRANSPORTATION LINES                306

  Origin and Reasons for Road Work. Working out Road Tax
  Abolished. Private Financing, Public Financing. Taxation: Tax
  Defined, Classified. Direct Taxes -- Levied Uniformly. Indirect
  Taxes: Defined, Classes of, Special Taxes, How Levied, Benefits
  Decrease with Distance, Petitioning Influence -- Curve of,
  Concrete Illustration. Zone Weights: How Determined, Plots and
  Tables. Frontage: Defined, Calculation, Illustrative Example.
  Unequal Zones and Irregular Lots -- Concrete Illustration.
  Another Method of Apportioning Assessments. Rule for
  Assessment. Miscellaneous Sources of Revenue: Public Service
  Corporations, Bus and Truck Lines, Municipal Sale of Water,
  Gas, Electricity, Ice, Coal. Public Ownership of Transportation
  and other Necessary Utilities. Bonds: Sinking Fund, Serial,
  Annuity, Comparison of Costs. Term of Bonds. Stocks and
  Bonds. National and State Aid. Present Status of Federal Aid.
  Matching Federal Aid Dollars. Financing Highway Transportation:
  Individual, Partnership, Corporation. Public Ownership -- When
  Advisable.


  CHAPTER XI

  HIGHWAY ACCIDENTS AND THEIR MITIGATION                             351

  Accidents Result of Disorder, Codes to Prevent, Automobile
  Accidents Lead in Number. Causes: The Driver -- Mentally or
  Physically Unfit, Ignorant, Indifferent, Reckless; Driving
  and Operating: Recklessness, Speeding, Around Sharp Turns,
  Passing Cars. Horns. Stopping Cars on Grades, in Streets,
  etc., Backing. Other Forms of Carelessness. The Car: Skidding,
  Brakes, Flexibility, Steering and Turning Ability, Lights,
  Unlighted Vehicles, Speedometer. Bad Roads: Slipperiness --
  High Crowns, Embankments and Guard Rails, Super-elevation --
  Rule for, Clear Vision, Curves, Bridges and Culverts. Railway
  Crossing Accidents: Prevalency, Elimination of Crossings --
  Cost, Automobile Drivers Careless -- Observations, Methods
  of Mitigation; Bridge Clearance. Pedestrians -- Jay-walkers,
  Obstacles that Obscure Vision, Pedestrians on Country Roads,
  Slow Going Vehicles, Bicycles. Road and Traffic Regulations:
  Development of, Council of National Defense Code, Education
  Necessary.


  CHAPTER XII

  HIGHWAY ESTHETICS                                                  382

  Indispensable Elements of Architecture -- Stability, Utility,
  Beauty. Esthetic Sense -- Applied to Roads, to Landscape
  Gardening. Styles -- Natural and Formal. Application to Roads.
  Varieties of Road and Street Trees -- List; Shrubs -- List;
  Climbers -- List. Semi-formal Style. Telephone and other Poles,
  the Ideal Section, Legislation Necessary. Local Conditions
  Determine Planting.


  CHAPTER XIII

  AIDS AND ATTRACTIONS TO TRAFFIC AND TRAVEL                         418

  Pleasure Riding -- Extent, Advantages to a Community to Have
  Tourists Pass through, Ranking and Parking, Parking Spaces a
  Convenience to Motorists -- Space for and Angle of Parking,
  Location of Parking Spaces, One Way and Rotary Traffic, Opera
  House Traffic, Public Garages -- Several Story Garages.
  Terminal Stations -- Omaha, Poughkeepsie, Elsewhere. Gas, Air
  and Water Stations, Named and Numbered Roads; Marks, Signs and
  Guides -- Distance and Direction Signs, Letters and Colors,
  Warning Signs, Map Signs, Detour Signs, Location of Detour
  Markers, Dummy Cop, Semaphores, Signal Lights and Colors, Road
  and Street Lighting, City Traffic Lighting, Traffic Officer,
  Semaphore and Towers. Touring: Prevalency and Pleasures of,
  Camping -- Grounds, Caravans, and Equipment. Camp Sites,
  Hotels, Parks, Information Bureaus and Agencies.


  INDEX                                                              465




LIST OF INSERTS


  1. STORM KING HIGHWAY                                   _Frontispiece_
  A Great Engineering Project Along the Hudson between Cornwall and
  West Point, N. Y.
                                                                    PAGE

  2. THE APPIAN WAY                                                   22
  Showing the original Paving Stones laid 300 B.C.

  3. MAP OF ITALY                                                     24
  Showing Some of the Twenty or More Roads that Radiated from Rome.

  4. MAP OF ROMAN ROADS IN ENGLAND                                    26
  (After Jackman: “Development of Transportation in Modern
  England.”)

  5. MAP OF THE NORTH-EASTERN PORTION OF THE UNITED STATES            36
  Showing the Location of Well-known Portages. There Were Other
  Portages Wherever Two Water Courses Came Near to Each Other. (See
  Farrand: “American Nation,” Vol. I, and Thwaites, Ib. Vol. VII.)

  6. MAP                                                              42
  Showing Main Highways and Waterways in the United States about
  1830. When the Railroads Entered the Industrial Arena, the Country
  Was Being Covered With a Net Work of Highways. (Based on Tanner’s
  Map of 1825 and Turner in “American Nation,” Vol. XIV.)

  7. MAP                                                              54
  Showing Transcontinental Trails in the United States.

  8. WAY BILL                                                         66
  Used on the Slaymaker Stage Line from Lancaster to Philadelphia,
  1815. (Courtesy of Prof. P. K. Slaymaker, Lincoln, Nebr.)

  9. THE SAULT STE. MARIE CANAL                                       76

  10. THE EVOLUTION OF THE RAILWAY TRAIN                             102
    1. The First Railway Coach--1825.
    2. Horse Power Locomotive--1829-30.
    3. Stourbridge Lion--1829.
    4. Stevenson’s Rocket Locomotive--1829.
    5. The DeWitt Clinton Locomotive--1831.
    (From Brown’s “First Locomotive”--Courtesy of D. Appleton &
    Company.)

  11. MODERN LOCOMOTIVES                                             120
    1. Showing the Growth in the Size of Locomotives During the Past
       Twenty Years. The Smaller Locomotive is an _American_ Type
       Class Engine of 1900. The Larger is a _Mountain Type_ Engine.
       Both are Used on the C. B. & Q. R. R. Photographed at
       Lincoln, Nebr., Sept., 1922.
    2. One of the New Gearless _Electric_ Locomotives Built by the
       General Electric Company for the C. M. & St. Paul R. R.

  12. TRANSPORTATION ACROSS DEATH VALLEY                             126
  A Picturesque Method of Earlier Days.

  13. GOOD ROADS DAY IN JACKSON COUNTY, MO.                          132

  14. CHART OF THE ORGANIZATION OF THE U. S. BUREAU OF PUBLIC ROADS
      AND RURAL ENGINEERING, 1917                                    142

  15. HARD SURFACE HIGHWAY IN OREGON                                 146

  16. A FARMER’S WIFE MEETING THE POSTAL TRUCK                       146

  17. TRACKLESS TROLLEY OPERATED ON STATEN ISLAND, N. Y.             166

  18. MOTOR OR RAIL-CAR                                              166
  Showing the Gasoline Locomotive and Trailer, Operated by the
  Chicago & Great Western R. R.

  19. THE EVOLUTION OF THE STEAM AUTOMOBILE                          182
    1. The Cugnot Steam Carriage--1770.
    2. The Trevithick & Vivian Steam Carriage--1801.
    3. The Gurney Steam Carriage--1827.
    4. The Church Automobile Carriage (Steam)--1833.
    5. Gaillardit’s Steam Carriage--1894.
    (Courtesy of the _Scientific American_.)

  20. A MODERN RURAL PASSENGER BUS                                   184

  21. A NEW YORK CITY “STEPLESS” BUS                                 184
  It Has an Emergency Door, with Wire Window Guards, and will Seat
  30 Persons.

  22. THE EVOLUTION OF THE GASOLINE MOTOR CAR                        188
    1. Panhard & Levassor Carriage--1895.
    2. Duryea Motor Wagon--1895.
    3. The Benz Motocycle.
    4. Hertel’s Gasoline Carriage--1896.
    5. The Olds Horseless Carriage.
    6. Winton’s Racing Machine.
    (Courtesy of the _Scientific American_.)

  23. HAULING BEANS BY MOTOR TRUCK AND TRAILER                       200
  Sacramento Valley, Calif.

  24. HAULING SUGAR BEETS TO MARKET IN A MOTOR TRUCK                 200

  25. TRAFFIC ON FIFTH AVENUE, NEW YORK CITY                         234

  26. GIVING A MACADAM ROAD AN APPLICATION OF TARVIA BINDER          254
  This is Followed by a Coat of Screenings and then the Road is
  Rolled Again.

  27. A ROAD OF MIXED ASPHALT AND CONCRETE BEING TESTED OUT          254

  28. CROWNING A DIRT ROAD IN CALIFORNIA WITH TRACTOR DRAWN GRADER   263

  29. A MILK TRUCK EQUIPPED WITH BOTH CANS AND TANK                  296

  30. A LUMBER LOG TRUCK USED IN THE NORTHWEST                       296

  31. A NATIONAL HIGHWAY IN THE MOUNTAINS OF MARYLAND                332

  32. A DANGEROUS CURVE MADE SAFE BY AN ARTISTIC CONCRETE WALL       364
  The Tennessee State Highway at Lookout Mountain, Built of Cemented
  Concrete.

  33. PIN OAK STREET TREES                                           388
  About 15 Years Old on Land that Was Once Considered to be a part
  of the “Great American Desert.”

  34. A COTTONWOOD WIND BREAK                                        388
  Formerly very Common in the Prairie Region.

  35. WARNING AND DIRECTION SIGNS USED IN THE STATE OF ILLINOIS      434

  36. TRAFFIC GUIDES                                                 442
  (From Eno’s “The Science of Highway Traffic Regulation.”)

  37. NEW YORK CITY TRAFFIC GUIDES                                   444
  “In November, 1903, one hundred blue and white enameled signs,
  directing slow-moving vehicles to keep near the right-hand curb,
  were put in use in New York. These were probably the first traffic
  regulation signs ever used.”
  (From Eno’s “The Science of Highway Traffic Regulation.”)

  38. TRAFFIC TOWER ON FIFTH AVENUE, NEW YORK CITY                   446

  39. CAMPING GROUND AND CARAVAN                                     458

  40. A GIPSYING TOURING CARAVAN                                     458




HIGHWAYS AND HIGHWAY TRANSPORTATION




CHAPTER I

TRANSPORTATION A MEASURE OF CIVILIZATION


As the several peoples inhabiting the earth have progressed from
barbarism through the different stages of civilization, the
transportation occasioned by their wants and desires has kept a close
pace. By a study of the transportation--travel, movement of goods and
commodities--and the means and facilities for its accomplishment,
the relative civilization of any people, their rank and position may
be accurately surveyed, graduated, and estimated. The highways of a
nation, whether they be of the land or sea, or both, are most vital
elements in its progress and could almost as well as transportation be
considered the measuring rod of civilization.


=Stages in Civilization.=--Sociologists differ as to what constitute
the several stages of civilization. One might trace the development
of man through literature, another through art, another through
government; others consider his economic activities the more
fundamental factors. The most widely used economic classification,
according to Ely,[1] is based upon the increasing power of man over
nature and consists of (1) Direct Appropriation, (2) The Pastoral
Stage, (3) The Agricultural Stage, (4) The Handicraft Stage, and (5)
The Industrial Stage. These stages are well illustrated in English
history. The stage of direct appropriation corresponding to the
prehistoric period and up to 54 B.C., when the Romans overran the
island of Britain; the Pastoral stage from this time to the invasion by
William the Conqueror, 1066; the Agricultural up to about the discovery
of America, when a great impetus was given to travel and discovery; the
stage of Handicraft, from 1500 to the invention of the steam engine
and its application to manufacture at the beginning of the eighteenth
century; the Industrial stage, to the present time. While these
stages necessarily overlap each other considerably, it will be seen
that as one declines the next is ushered in with some radical change
in government or in economic or industrial condition. The present
day--immediately following as it does the Great World War, out of
which have issued many scientific discoveries and inventions, notably
those advancing the theory and practice of air navigation, with many
potential possibilities in new lines of transportation; and the setting
forth of an idea which is capable of leading to a better understanding
or even a confederation of nations and altering all forms of national
government--may be the beginning of a new stage of civilization.


=Stage of Direct Appropriation.=--This stage covers the whole course of
prehistoric man from the time the first ape stood erect some 500,000
years ago[2] through the stone, bronze, and iron ages to the age of
literature and art. During these long years civilization traveled far,
for the least cultured savages observed have advanced not only away
beyond the highest of the lower animals but also beyond the lowest
intellectual estate of which human beings may be supposed capable
of subsisting. And from the lowest to the highest of these tribes
are shown traits varying as greatly in degree as from one stage in
the above classification to another. The Indians at the time of the
discovery of America and the three centuries following, and many of the
tribes of Africa during the explorations of Livingstone and Stanley,
were and still are in this stage and hence have been subjected to
scientific study and investigation. Their governments while variable
are of the primitive types. Ordinarily a chief autocratically rules
because of hereditary influence. Little is manufactured, planting is
scarcely known; by hunting, fishing, and collecting nature’s products
of wild seeds and roots is a subsistence obtained often with long,
arduous, and dangerous labor. Efficiency, as we understand that term
to-day, is very low, and the number of persons that a given area can
support is few. No one can predict but what to-morrow he may have to
go hungry or suffer cold from the inclemency of the weather, for his
store of food is _nil_ or small, his shelter rudimentary and clothing
scanty. Note the hardships of the party of Henry M. Stanley during his
expedition across the African wilderness in quest of Emin Pasha.[3]
Notwithstanding Stanley’s men were possessed of firearms and edged
tools and carried some provisions with them, and were traversing
a country teeming with vegetable and animal life, many times they
were on the verge of starvation. The number of the natives in these
wildernesses are no doubt kept low because of the extreme difficulties
of procuring the necessities of life.

The barbarian requires less, of course, than the civilized man; he
is satisfied with mere subsistence. He is improvident and relies
upon picking up his needs from day to day as a robin picks worms
from the grass. Cannibalism often exists, for the sacredness of
human life has not yet been established, although magic and crude
religious rites are seldom missing. While private personal property
is recognized and retained by personal prowess, the ownership of land
is absent. Coöperation of the crudest sort only is found; division
of labor consists largely in having the females perform the work of
planting, cultivating, carrying burdens--when these are attempted
at all--cooking and caring for the children in the crudest fashion,
leaving to the men the work of hunting, fishing, and fighting. Each
tribe is self-sufficient and consists of a chief with a few followers
bound together loosely for the purposes of protection from other
tribes. Exchange, barter, and trade is at its lowest ebb; consequently
transportation is practically unnecessary, and roadways except mere
trails do not exist.


=The Pastoral Stage.=--In the process of evolution certain animals
undoubtedly were domesticated and used for food. Whether or not this
domestication preceded or followed primitive agriculture or “hoe
culture,” is not important, as the pastoral stage of culture evidently
lies between the hunting and the farming stages. The written history of
mankind indicates that this stage largely prevailed among the earlier
Hebrew, Greek, and Teutonic races. A private ownership in cattle and
herds was recognized, but the necessity of moving about with the flocks
precluded fixed habitations, although large areas were claimed and held
or endeavored to be held from trespass thereon by neighboring tribes.
A given area would thus support a much larger number of people than
in the preceding stage. A small amount of trading or bartering was
carried on and consequently some transportation was required, but road
building as such was little known. Rivers and coast waters for canoes
and dugouts were no doubt early taken advantage of by the aborigines of
bordering territories. But since there is so little division of labor,
so little of barter and exchange, commerce was not developed much
during this stage.


=The Agricultural Stage.=--The growing and storage of crops, increased
by the use of animal power, greatly changed the economic and social
conditions of man. It made possible and profitable the living in fixed
habitations, even in communities, and this brought out the needs of
rules of government. But even yet each family provided without the
assistance of others for practically all its own needs. In planting,
reaping, threshing, grinding the meal and cooking, the family became
the unit. No great division of labor was yet evident, consequently
exchange, barter, and transportation still remained low. Ownership of
land was necessary if a family was to cultivate the same land year
after year. This meant definite rules and laws and consequently the
development of governments. Ownership of herds and land brought wealth
and a certain distinction in the community. Slavery, which had no doubt
existed to some extent in the pastoral stage, here, because it greatly
increased wealth, grew immensely. Large families likewise meant more
workmen and greater wealth, distinction, and leisure, hence polygamy
and polyandry often existed. As the evolution continued there was a
trend toward handicraft and the division of labor; the products of one
place began to be exchanged for the products of other places. This
necessitated some forms of transportation, meager though they might be,
and trails between communities.


=The Manorial and Feudal Systems.=--In England and on the continent
during the later years of this stage there were developed the manorial
or feudal forms of government. The people lived largely in villages
each controlled by a lord or earl (eorl) and to whom in return for
his protection, the use of land, and other favors, they were bound to
return to him service in the cultivation of his land and in waging war
when called upon to do so. The lords in turn held their allegiance to
the king. Some handicraftsmen were among the retainers but they were so
few that they did not form an important part of the village, neither
was there a great deal of travel or transportation. The manor instead
of the family was the unit, and it was almost self-sufficient. The land
was allotted in small tracts and tilled in the manner designated by the
lord. Each person raised barley, oats, peas, and lentils sufficient for
his own needs. Variation in crops was little practiced. Much land at
distances from the manor was still devoted to herds and flocks.

However, toward the later part of this stage, the feudal system began
to break down. There were more free-holders and free-tenants, living
upon the land they cultivated according to their own ideas. Wheat, rye,
flax, and root crops were assuming greater importance. This variety in
farming and the larger fields cultivated by the individual naturally
increased the products to be sold or exchanged and hence increased
transportation. People who had devoted only so much of their time
to spinning and weaving as was necessary to supply their own family
needs, were beginning to do more, selling the excess and purchasing
from others things not grown or manufactured by themselves. Thus were
developed towns as centers of trade; money as a medium of exchange
assumed greater importance; and a division of labor brought into being
and increased the social standing of trades and professions. Thus was
ushered in the Handicraft Stage of civilization.


=The Handicraft Stage.=--In England this stage lasted through
approximately five centuries, from 1200 to 1700. The merging of one
period into another came about so gradually that a definite date
can hardly be designated, and the time is so long that undoubtedly
many changes occurred in the economic activities as well as in the
government and literature of the people.

While it is probable that merchants, middlemen who bought from one
person and sold to another, had thrived throughout the earlier
civilizations of Asia, Africa, and Europe, and even extended their
trade to Britain, merchandising held a comparatively minor position
in England until the twelfth century, when merchants became very
prominent, so much so that combinations or guilds were formed by them
in all the large towns for the purpose of protecting and controlling
the conduct of business and, to some extent, of maintaining a
monopolistic control of the trade in their particular businesses. A
guild was an association or fraternity of persons engaged in the same
line of business. It differed from a trade-union in that the guild was
an association of masters and employees, whereas the trade-union is an
association of employees only.

Many of the merchant guilds grew wealthy and strong; they obtained
Royal Charters from the Crown either by direct payment or by an
arrangement to pay a special tax, or secured recognition in the
borough charters. By authority of these they were endowed with certain
privileges such as: (_a_) limiting the number of their own members and
the number who could participate in any line of merchandising; (_b_)
entering into secret price agreements and trade arrangements; (_c_)
controlling the import and export of wares; (_d_) the establishing of a
court which had absolute jurisdiction over its members and others not
members engaged in the same line of business. This court “could settle
trade disputes, discipline its apprentices with the whip if necessary,
could imprison its journeymen who struck work, and could fine its
master members who acted against its rules. And, finally, the members
of the company were forbidden to appeal to any other court unless their
own court failed to obtain justice for them.”[4] Moreover, the meeting
together for social enjoyment, feasting, and worship; the helping one
another in sickness and poverty; and uniting together for the pursuit
of some common cause, naturally brought about very close and fraternal
relations.


=Craft-guilds.=--Craftsmen of like occupations joined together
in guilds also and they, too, became not only numerous but very
influential. They regulated their own internal affairs and specified
how many apprentices might be entered, and under what circumstances
a man might become a journeyman or master craftsman. Numerous other
guilds, social and religious, were extant throughout Europe.


=Effect upon Trade.=--The merchant guilds and the craft-guilds
materially affected the production and trade of the community and
country. The merchants of Phoenicia and later of Greece and Rome are
said to have visited the British Isles to secure tin and copper. The
great merchant guilds outfitted adventures to the ends of the then
known world to secure the goods--whether they were silks, spices,
furs or grain--in which they dealt. They were instrumental in the
passage of laws encouraging and securing commerce. They themselves
regulated the quality of goods dealt in. For example the Goldsmiths’
Guild of London required that all silver and gold-plate and jewelry
manufactured within three miles of London should be brought to the
guild hall for inspection. If it did not come up to the specified
standard it was ordered remelted; if it did it received the “Hall Mark”
that anyone purchasing it might be assured of its quality. It is said
the guilds were so punctilious in the matter of quality that “Made in
England” goods received in the markets of the world a standing of the
highest rank; a reputation that never entirely disappeared, and as a
consequence English uprightness of character became proverbial.


=The Domestic System.=--All this made necessary the building of ships
and harbors, and the improvement of internal highways of trade, and
these in turn stimulated manufacture which as yet was carried on
by hand. The family instead of the town or guild became the unit;
apprentices were entered and kept, usually, as members of the family
and worked along side the sons and daughters of the master. As these
grew to manhood their pay, beginning with mere keep, was gradually
increased with their work and responsibility until at the end of seven
years they were fitted to go forth as journeymen and later themselves
became masters. The work was done at or near the master’s home. The raw
material was usually received from a middleman, to whom was returned
the finished product; the middleman disposed of it to the merchant who
in turn sold it to the consumer.

This corresponds rather closely to what is called the “sweat shop”
method of the present time. Goods in a raw or a semi-raw state are
received by the workman from the “manufacturer” and carried home;
the workman performs, with the help of his family, certain specified
operations and upon the return of the goods is paid for his work. Or
in agriculture, to the contract method, whereby specified products
such as sugar beets, sweet-corn, peas, beans, tomatoes, fruits, and
other products for manufacture, canning, preserving, or pickling in
a factory, are raised by the farmer and sold to the manufacturer
at a previously agreed-upon contract price. Under the guild plan
the manufacturer or importer sold usually to the ultimate consumer.
So the economic system was gradually growing more complex, and the
interdependence of man upon man more pronounced.

The older agricultural procedure had not entirely disappeared. Most
families cultivated land, and raised more or less stock and poultry,
but performed the work of manufacturing as a side line, as at present
in the Middle West farmers make grain and stock raising their main
industry with dairying, vegetable gardening, poultry, and eggs as mere
adjuncts, although these latter often bring in about as much money as
the former. Defoe[5] describes these methods (1724-1726) as follows:

  [The land] was divided into small inclosures from two acres to six
  or seven each, seldom more; every three or four pieces of land had
  a house belonging to them ... hardly an house standing out of a
  speaking distance from another.... We could see at every house a
  tenter, and on almost every tenter a piece of cloth or kersie or
  shaloon.... At every considerable house was a manufactury.... Every
  clothier keeps one horse, at least, to carry his manufactures to
  the market, and everyone generally keeps a cow or two or more for
  his family. By this means the small pieces of inclosed land about
  each house are occupied, for they scarce sow corn enough to feed
  their poultry.... The houses are full of lusty fellows, some at the
  dye-vat, some at the looms, others dressing the cloths, the women or
  children carding or spinning, being all employed, from the youngest
  to the oldest.


=Governmental Control.=--The numerous guilds reached their zenith
during the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries and then gradually
diminished in importance. Some of them, however, still remain active in
London. During the recent World War several were engaged in welfare
work. Guilds in France were destroyed or lapsed into desuetude during
the revolution, 1791-1815. Those of Spain and Portugal likewise during
the revolutionary years of 1833-40; of Austria and Germany in 1859-60
and of Italy in 1864. Guilds, as known in Europe, never found a
substantial lodging in the United States.

The functions of the guilds were gradually taken over by the
government, which seemed later to be a better and more satisfactory
medium to control labor, trade, and commerce. Laws were enacted in
England to regulate the entering of apprentices, to force able bodied
men to serve as agricultural laborers in case of need, and to work the
roads annually. Justices of the Peace were given authority to settle
disputes and regulate wages. Foreign trade was by laws and Royal
Grants encouraged; likewise immigration of artisans to introduce new
industries, the establishment of foreign colonies and the development
of banking and insurance. Almshouses were built and poor laws enacted
to care for the old and indigent. The public roads were still very poor
but a beginning was made for their betterment. Macaulay, in writing of
the State of England in 1685,[6] has considerable to say regarding the
condition of the highways. Speaking of the lack of homogeneity among
the people he says:

  There was not then the intercourse which now exists between the two
  classes. [The Londoner and the rustic Englishman.] Only very great
  men were in the habit of dividing the year between town and country.
  Few esquires came to the capital thrice in their lives. [And again],
  The chief cause which made the fusion of the different elements of
  society so imperfect was the extreme difficulty found in passing from
  place to place. _Of all_ inventions, the alphabet and the printing
  press alone excepted, _those inventions which abridge distance have
  done most for the civilization of our species. Every improvement_ of
  the means of locomotion benefits mankind morally and intellectually
  as well as materially, and not only facilitates the interchange of
  the various productions of nature and art, but tends to remove
  national and provincial antipathies, and to bind together all the
  branches of the great human family.

  [Further on], It was by the highways that both travellers and goods
  generally passed from place to place; and those highways appear to
  have been far worse than might have been expected from the degree of
  wealth and civilization which the nation had even then attained.

The degree of civilization attained was no doubt due to other things
than the public roads. Sea transportation brought to England the
products of the world. Coast transportation was well developed and
river and canal transportation had well begun. Macaulay states that

  One chief cause of the badness of the roads seems to have been the
  defective state of the law. Every parish was bound to repair the
  highways which passed through it. The peasantry were forced to
  give their gratuitous labor six days in the year.... That a route
  connecting two great towns, which have a large and thriving trade
  with each other, should be maintained at the cost of the rural
  population scattered between them, is obviously unjust.

This sounds like modern arguments against paving rural roads and
charging the cost to the abutting property, and is evidently one good
reason for state and national aid.

However, transportation and travel continued to improve. On the main
roads “waggons” were employed to transport goods and stage coaches
for people, while pack animals and riding horses were used on less
frequented trails and roads. Four and six horses were necessary to pull
a carriage or a coach “because with a smaller number there was great
danger of sticking fast in the mire.” A diligence ran between London
and Oxford in two days, but in 1669 it was announced that the “Flying
Coach would perform the whole journey between sunrise and sunset.” The
heads of the university after solemn deliberation gave consent and the
experiment proved successful. The rival university at Cambridge, not
to be outdone, set up a diligence to run from Cambridge to London in
one day. Soon flying coaches were carrying passengers to other points.
Posts were established for the change of horses and longer distances
essayed. This mode of traveling was extolled by contemporaneous writers
“as far superior to any similar vehicles ever known in the world.” It
is not to be thought that these advances in rapid transportation were
without objectors. According to Macaulay,

  It was vehemently argued that this mode of conveyance would be fatal
  to the breed of horses and to the noble art of horsemanship; that the
  Thames, which had long been an important nursery of seamen, would
  cease to be the chief thoroughfare from London up to Windsor and
  down to Gravesend; that saddlers and spurriers would be ruined by
  hundreds; that numerous inns, at which mounted travelers had been in
  the habit of stopping, would be deserted, and would no longer pay any
  rent; that the new carriages were too hot in summer and too cold in
  winter; that the passengers were grievously annoyed by invalids and
  crying children; that the coach sometimes reached the inn so late
  that it was impossible to get supper, and sometimes started so early
  that it was impossible to get breakfast.

Objections of this character have been made against every innovation
and advancement in travel and transportation to the present day when
the air-plane is beginning to attract notice as an economic vehicle.
Laws were then demanded and passed, as they are now, to regulate power
and speed, accommodations and rates, and multifarious other things
which might affect the privileges or profits of those interested in
older methods, as well as laws for the protection and safety of the
general public.


=Agriculture.=--It might be thought that the agriculture of the
preceding stage of development might wane. But not so; with the
division of labor and improved transportation and marketing facilities
agriculture received a great impetus. Larger tracts were farmed by
the individual. Growing crops and stock became more of a business and
from the lords of the manor was evolved the landed aristocracy of the
country. To be sure, there were holders who cultivated their own soil,
but much was held upon leaseholds for short or long periods. Many still
lived in the villages where “commons” were laid out for the pasturage
of the few cows each family needed for its own milk. Farms were
divided by hedges into fields or closes, the amount of land depending
upon the rent. The “Book of Surveying,” by Fitzherbert, 1539, gives
reasons for such closes and explains the manner of laying them out so
that they shall be most convenient and together. The following is a
specimen of his style:

  Now every husband hath sixe severall closes whereof iii. be for
  corne, the fourthe for his leyse, the fyfthe for his commen pastures,
  and the sixte for his haye; and in wynter time there is but one
  occupied with corne, and then hath the husbande other fyue to occupy
  tyll lent come, and then he that hath his falowe felde, his ley
  felde, and his pasture felde al sommer, and when he hath mowen his
  medowe then he hath his medowe grounde, soo that if he hath any
  weyke catel that wold be amended, or dyvers maner of catel, he may
  put them in any close he wyll, the which is a great advantage; and
  if all should lye commen, then wolde the edyche of the corne feldes
  and the aftermath of all the medowes be eaten in X or XII dayes. And
  the rych men that hath moche catel wold have the advantage, and the
  poore man can have no helpe nor relefe in wynter when he hath most
  nede; ... and if any of his thre closes that he hath for his corne be
  worn or ware bare, then he may breke and plowe up his close that he
  had for his layse, or the close that he had for his commen pasture,
  or bothe, and sowe them with corne and let the other lye for a time,
  and so shall he have always reist grounds, the which will bear moche
  corne, with lytel donge; and also he shall have a great profyte of
  the wod in the hedges when it is growen; and not only these profytes
  and advantages aforesaid but he shall save moche more than al these,
  for by reason of these closes he shall save meate drinke, and wages
  of a shepherde, the wages of the heerdmen, and the wages of the
  swineherde, the which may fortune to be as chargeable as all his
  holle rent; and also his corne shall be better saved from eatings or
  destroying with catel.

Later the system of crop rotation came into vogue resulting in great
improvement in the fertility of the soil.

In the same author’s “Book of Husbandry,” 1534, are described farm
tools and their uses. There are explanations to show where a “horse
plow” is better and where an “oxen plow.” It indicates that beans,
peas, wheat, barley, and oats are common crops, and that some
vegetables and root-crops were coming into use. Wheat was probably
sowed after plowing up a pasture or “fallowe” field, for he observes,

  the greater clottes (clods) the better wheate, for the clottes
  kepe the wheate warm all wynter; and at march they will melte and
  breake and fae in many small peces, the which is a new donynge and
  refreshynge of the corne.

The industries and arts of transportation continued to develop: ocean
craft, especially, became more numerous and more efficient. Learning
and art grew in harmony as the intercourse of the peoples of the
country and of the world increased.


=The Industrial Stage.=--This stage of economical civilization, while
brought about gradually through many years as factories and special
work shops came into existence, was nevertheless greatly accelerated
by the inventions of the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries. The
invention of the canal lock (it is a disputed question whether in
Holland or in Italy) in the fourteenth century had made practicable
the building of many canals throughout Europe, one of the largest
across France connecting the Bay of Biscay with the Mediterranean Sea.
However, the building of important commercial canals began in England
with the Bridgewater Canal from Worsley to Manchester, completed in
1767. Green[7] tells us that the main roads which lasted fairly well
through the middle ages had broken down under the increased production
of the eighteenth century. That the new lines of trades lay along
“mere country lanes”; that much of the woolen trade had to be carried
on long trains of pack animals at a large cost; that transportation
“in the case of heavier goods such as coal distribution was almost
impracticable save along the greater rivers.” In fact coal was
ordinarily referred to as “sea coal” because it was brought to most
ports by water routes. The Duke of Bridgewater and a young engineer
of the name of Brindley solved the problem of transportation for the
time being by beginning the great network of canals which later covered
England to the extent of more than 3000 miles. Too great praise cannot
be given to the engineers and constructors of these canals. Brindley
considered canals not as adjuncts of rivers and bays, on the contrary
“rivers were only meant,” he said, “to feed canals.” He carried this
canal by means of an aqueduct over the river to Manchester, thus
bringing the coal to a new thriving manufacturing city. Green further
says (Paragraph 1528)

  To English trade the canal opened up the richest of all markets, the
  market of England itself. Every part of the country was practically
  thrown open to the manufacturer; and the impulse which was given by
  this facility of carriage was at once felt in a vast development of
  production. But such a development would have been impossible had
  not the discovery of this new mode of distribution been accompanied
  by the discovery of a new productive force. In the coal which lay
  beneath her soil England possessed a store of force which had
  hitherto remained almost useless.

Not the least were the new methods of smelting iron with coal instead
of wood, which changed the whole aspect of the iron trade and which
made Great Britain for many years the workshop of the world. Lead,
copper, and tin were also mined and smelted by the use of coal. The
great advance of the “industrial revolution” did not come until Watt’s
improvements upon the steam engines of Newcomen, Cawley, and Savery,
which were themselves improvements over earlier inventions of Papin,
della Porta, and Worcester, made practicable the transfer of energy
stored up in coal to the movement of machinery. He changed the steam
engine from a clumsy, wasteful, inefficient machine into a workable
apparatus little differing from the reciprocating steam engines of the
present. Up until the successful operation of the turbine engine, the
principal advances upon Watt’s engine were mere details, though often
of great importance. For instance the boilers for the generation of
steam were improved; the enlarged application of the principle of
expansion, developing better cut-off mechanisms and governors, to more
economical construction due to better facilities and better knowledge
of materials and their properties; and to the application of the steam
engine in locomotives to propel transportation cars.

Watt’s claims and specifications for patents from 1769 to 1784 cover
such inventions as:

1. Methods of keeping the cylinder or steam vessel hot by covering it
with wood or other slow heat-conducting materials, by surrounding it
with steam or other heated bodies, and by suffering no water or other
substance colder than steam to touch it.

2. By condensing the steam in vessels entirely distinct from the
cylinder, called condensers, which are to be kept cool.

3. By drawing out of the condenser all uncondensed vapors or gases by
means of an air pump.

4. The use of the expansion force of steam directly against the
cylinder.

5. The double-acting engine and the conversion of the reciprocating
motion into a circular motion.[8]

6. Throttle valve with governor and gear for operating the same,
parallel motion for opening and closing the valves, and indicator.

These inventions not only made it possible to replace hand-labor often
with machines, but made it possible to construct machines much more
rapidly and to make them in every way more convenient.

Improvement in the arts of spinning and weaving caused the textile
establishments and population of north England to go forward by leaps
and bounds.

Previous to the invention of the “fly shuttle” in 1733 by John Kay of
Bury, the weaver had to throw the shuttle through the warp by hand.
Weaving became much more rapid; also by having several shuttles with
different-colored yarn stripes and checks could be woven into the
cloth. Since weaving had been made quicker and easier there came a
demand for more yarn. Three separate inventions satisfied this, viz.,
James Hargreaves of Blackburn invented his “jenny” about 1767, by
which eight threads could be spun at once. At the same time Richard
Arkwright, a barber of Preston, invented and developed the throstle
spinning frame (1769-1775). Samuel Crompton, about 1775, invented
his spinning “mule,” which seemed to combine the good principles of
the others. Power was applied to spinning about 1785 and then it was
weaving that needed accelerating. To Cartwright in 1784 is ascribed the
honor of inventing the power loom. Other inventions for both spinning
and weaving have made almost automatic the running of thousands of
spindles and hundreds of looms in a single factory.


=Railways Developed.=--With power manufacturing and increased
production due to the adoption of improved factory systems came still
greater demand for transportation. Tramways had already been laid in
1676 for transporting coal from the mines to the sea. The rails were
first made of scantling laid in the wheel ruts, then of straight rails
of oak on which “one horse would draw from four or five chaldrons
of coal.” Later (1765) cast-iron trammels 5 feet long by 4 inches
wide were nailed to the wooden rails. These trammels collected dust,
therefore in 1789 Jessop laid down at Loughborough cast-iron edge-rails
and put a flanged wheel on the waggon. The rails were also placed on
chairs and sleepers (ties), the first instance of this method. The
distance apart of the rails was 4 feet 8¹⁄₂ inches, what is now known
as “standard gauge.” The success of these coal roads suggested tramways
for freight and for passenger transportation between the larger towns.
The canals had become congested with much traffic; it is said that
notwithstanding there were three between Liverpool and Manchester the
merchandise passing “did not average more than 1200 tons daily.” The
average rate of carriage was 18s. ($4.37) per ton, and the average
time of transit on the 50 miles of canal was thirty-six hours. The
conveyance of passengers by the improved coach roads, was, for then,
quite rapid but rather expensive.

Some experimental locomotives had been made and used in the mining
regions. Their success led to the building of others. The Stockton and
Darlington Railway opened in September, 1825, by a train of thirty-four
vehicles, making a gross load of 90 tons, drawn by one engine driven by
George Stephenson, with a signal man on horseback in advance. The train
made at times as high as 15 miles per hour. The rail used weighed 28
pounds per yard. This road was intended entirely for freight but the
demand of the people to ride was so pressing that a passenger coach to
carry six inside and fifteen to twenty outside was put on to make the
round trip in two hours at a fare of one shilling.

When the bill passed for the Liverpool and Manchester Railway in 1826
Stephenson was appointed engineer in charge at a salary of $5000 per
year. This road made a great impression on the national mind, no little
enhanced by the competition of locomotives at its completion in 1829,
resulting in the victory of Stephenson’s engine the “Rocket.” It made
the then astonishing speed of 35 miles per hour and proved conclusively
the practicability of railway locomotion.

To follow the progress of industry during the nineteenth and twentieth
centuries would require volumes. More has probably been accomplished,
not without evils at times, than in the whole preceding history of the
world. And as no small part of these accomplishments are the means
and amount of travel and traffic and associated developments and
organization made necessary by the vast industries which now supply the
world’s wants, once more it may be asserted that the civilization of
the world can be measured by its transportation.


=Some Historic Roads and Their Influence.=--In the brief survey
of the stages through which ordinarily a civilization passes note
has frequently been made that as the world progresses so does the
necessary transportation increase and improve in character. It is not
contended that civilization follows the improvement of transportation,
although that is no doubt sometimes the case, but that the state of
transportation follows up and down with the state of civilization.
Very likely the same could be truthfully said of other elements of
civilization such as literature, art, religion, and government. Or
even if there be applied Guizot’s three tests of a civilized people:
“First, they review their pledges and honor; second, they reverence and
pursue the beautiful in painting, architecture, and literature; third,
they exhibit sympathy in reform toward the poor, the weak and the
unfortunate,” it will be found that those nations most progressed in
traffic and travel will rank highest in these tests.


=Early Highways.=--To return to some of the important earlier
highways. All evidence seems to indicate that civilization had its
origin in western Asia. Early history speaks of the civilization
and culture of Arabia and Egypt, of Assyria and Persia. Coeval with
these civilizations were trade and commerce. Great caravans of camels
traversed the sandy highway with their accompanying merchants carrying
many products of many lands--frankincense and myrrh from Arabia; cloths
and carpets from Babylon and Sardis; shawls from Cashmere; leather
from Cordavan and Morocco; tin, copper, gold, and silver utensils from
Phœnicia; pearls from the Far East; and grain and other agricultural
products nourished and grown by the beneficence of the great mother
Nile. The extensive civilizations of these countries are handed down
stingily by cuneiform inscriptions on clay tablets scattered here and
there among the ruins of their ancient towns and villages, or inscribed
upon granite mountain sides as historical memoranda for future
generations. Even Holy Writ says little about roads and highways, but
that they were known is evident from the few references made. Those
things which are commonplace often receive least attention by writers.
In Isaiah, 35:8, may be read: “And a highway shall be there, and a
way, and it shall be called the way of holyness ... the wayfaring
men, though fools, shall not err therein.” And again, Isa. 40:3-4,
“The voice of him that cryeth in the wilderness, prepare ye the way
of the Lord, make straight in the desert a highway for our God. Every
valley shall be exalted, and every mountain and hill shall be made low:
and the crooked shall be made straight and the rough places plain.”
These would certainly indicate that in Isaiah’s time there were both
travelers and roads marked and graded. Isaiah in other places shows
that he, if not himself a road builder, is familiar with that process:
Isa. 57:14, “And shall say, cast ye up, cast ye up, prepare the way
take up the stumbling block out of the way of my people.” Isa. 62:10,
“Prepare ye the way of the people; cast up, cast up the highway; gather
out the stones; lift up a standard for the people.” Also Jeremiah
likens the path of the wicked to an ungraded road. Jeremiah 18:15,
“Because my people have forgotten me, they have burned incense to
vanity, they have caused them to stumble in their ways from the ancient
paths, to walk in paths, in a way not cast up.”

The trade along the eastern coast of the Mediterranean and across
Palestine and the great Arabian deserts to Persia, to Babylonia, and
possibly to India was evidently of importance to the fluctuating
destinies of Egypt and Assyria, and later of Greece, Rome, and
Turkey; so much so, that many wars were waged for the control of the
great highway over which it passed. Palestine became a territory of
importance. It is said Jerusalem has suffered some three score sieges,
most of them because she dominated this highway, being at or near the
confluence of its forks reaching east into the deserts, north toward
the straits over which a crossing could be made into Europe, and
southward to Egypt. Egypt and Assyria fought for its control; Greece
and Rome in turn came into possession of it; Turkey and the Mohammedans
for centuries monopolized it; and the recent great World War was no
doubt accentuated by the cupidity of Germany to control a long line of
transportation through Austria-Hungary, Bulgaria, Turkey, Mesopotamia
to Persia, Baluchistan and India.[9]

Alexander the Great overran the East, besieged Tyre, and converted
an island into an isthmus in order to secure and hold control of the
highway and the rich bounty imagined to be at its farther end. “Babylon
is a ruin, a stately and solitary group of palms marks where Memphis
stood, jackals slake their thirst in the waters of the sacred lake by
the hall of a thousand columns at Thebes, but the road that formed the
nexus between these vanished civilizations remains after the winds of
four millenniums have sighed themselves to silence over the graves of
its forgotten architects and engineers.”[10]

But the Greater Greece, built up by the personality and sword of
Alexander the Great, fell, largely, because of the lack of roads.
The very name of Alexander was sufficient to subdue city after city,
but as soon as his personal influence was at an end the cities fell
apart. Here was a wonderful opportunity. With magnificent natural-made
waterways, with innumerable safe harbors what a chance for commerce,
for trade with the entire world. The islands of the Aegean Sea were
stepping stones to Asia Minor; Macedonia furnished an open route for
the Bosphorus and Dardanelles; Thrace led to those fertile lands
surrounding the Black Sea and extending away to the Caspian and joining
once more with empire already conquered. On the west there was close
at hand the islands of, and land bordering, the Adriatic, the great
Italian boot, and Sicily where new civilizations were ready to rise and
take on Greek culture for the mere offering. It would seem as though
Greece ought to have become the fostering mother of world colonization,
but the different parts of Greece proper, where the real mental ability
lay, were separated by lack of roads from each other. Athens was
potentially nearer to the Black Sea than to Sparta; Corinth was nearer
Sicily than to Macedonia. The many Grecian tribes were distinct, having
different laws, customs and manners. Intercourse, which could have
been brought about had there been interconnecting roads, was necessary
to weld the people into a homogeneous mass. Sparta and Athens, less
than an hour apart by modern air-plane, because of the mountains,
roadless and almost pathless between them, barriers which they failed
to surmount, developed different forms of civilization, different
thought, habits, and tastes. To Athens the world owes an everlasting
debt for masterpieces in poetry, oratory, architecture, and sculpture.
“There was no Spartan sculpture, no Laconian painter, no Lacedaemonian
poet.” The lack of intercommunication caused differences in language,
in customs, in ideals, and in manners, making of Greece a heterogeneous
conglomeration of tribes where internecine strife was ever present, and
no strong centralized government could exist. Lucky for the best of the
Greek civilization that it would be carried to the ends of the world by
the roads of a young giant which was arising in the west.


=Roman Roads.=--The roads in Rome bore such a prominent part in
the civilization that they could not be entirely overlooked by
contemporaneous writers. The roads are often described as military
roads because they were primarily planned to transport soldiers
quickly and easily to any desirable part of the empire. But no doubt
the greatness of Rome was due more to the traffic in goods and people
brought to and taken away from her precincts by these roads than to
military prowess. Her roads were the arteries and veins through which
the life blood of the nation pulsated; were the sensory and motive
nerves which fetched and carried intelligence, which prompted action.
She received and she disseminated. She was the hub of the universe, her
roads the spokes radiating to and holding together the limits of her
vast domain.

[Illustration:

  © _Underwood and Underwood_

THE APPIAN WAY

Showing the original Paving Stones laid 300 B.C.]

How many roads Rome built it is difficult to state, for they were
found in all parts of the empire. Some, as those in Italy, were very
carefully and substantially built; others less so, grading down to
mere trails in the hintermost districts. The Via Egnatia, which was
one of the important provincial roads, is said by Strabo to have been
regularly laid out and marked by milestones from Dyrrhacium, (Durazzo)
on the coast of the Adriatic across from the heel of Italy’s boot
through Thessalonica (Saloniki) and Philippi to Cypselus on the Hebnis
and later to the Hellespont, for Cicero speaks of “that military way of
ours which connects us with the Hellespont.” This road became historic
as the scene of the conflict between the friends and enemies of the
decaying Roman republic. Brutus and Cassius on the one hand here in 42
B.C., met the forces of Antony and Octavius. There tradition states
the ghost of the dead Caesar met Brutus, and as a matter of fact, the
“liberators” were cut to pieces in two engagements. Brutus and Cassius,
believing the cause of the republic lost, both committed suicide, and
the Roman world was soon thereafter in the hands of two masters--Antony
in the East and Octavius in the West. Three centuries later this road
became the leading highway to Byzantium (Constantinople), the great
city founded by Constantine, impregnable in its rocky seclusion,
dominating the waterway to the Black Sea and the rich agricultural land
beyond.

Some twenty of these roads, more if their branches be counted,
concentrated at the Eternal City and passed through her several gates.
Rome could sit on her seven hills and by means of these roads rule
the world. Among the most important of these were the Via Appia, Via
Flaminia and Via Aemilia, Via Aurelia, Via Ostiensis, and Via Latina.
One peculiarity of these Roman roads was their straightness, passing
almost in a direct line between determining points. Another, to
which is due their durability, was their massiveness. Their general
construction may be described as follows: The line of direction having
been laid out trenches were made along each side defining the width,
which was from 13 to 17 feet. The loose earth between was excavated
to secure a firm foundation and the road was then filled or graded
up to the required height with good material, sometimes as high as
20 feet. The pavement usually consisted of a layer of small stones;
then a layer of broken stones cemented with lime mortar; then a layer
of broken fragments of brick and pottery incorporated with clay and
lime; and finally a mixture of gravel and lime or a floor of hard
flat stones cut into rectangular slabs or irregular polygons fitted
nicely together. The whole was frequently 4 feet thick. Along the road
milestones were erected, some of them quite elaborate with carved names
and dates. Near the arch of Septimus Severus in the Roman Forum still
remains a portion of the “Golden Milestone,” a gilded pillar erected
by Augustus, on which were carved the names of roads and lengths
similar to a modern guide post. Some of these roads were used hundreds
of years until they fell into neglect after Rome had been invaded by
the northern barbarians. From a statement of Procopinus, the Appian
Way, construction begun 312 B.C., was in good condition 800 years
later, and he describes it as broad enough for two carriages to pass
each other. It was made of stones brought from some distant quarry
and so fitted to each other (over some 2 feet of gravel) that they
seemed to be thus formed by nature, rather than cemented by art. He
adds that notwithstanding the traffic of so many ages the stones were
not displaced, nor had they lost their original smoothness. The papal
government excavated, repaired, and reopened that road as far as Albano
and it is still being used as a highway.

[Illustration: MAP OF ITALY

Showing some of the twenty or more roads that radiated from Rome]

The Flaminian Way extended from Rome to Ariminum and thence was carried
under the name Via Aemilia through Parma, and Placentia across to
Spain. While not so much traffic passed over it, because the West
was sparsely settled, as over the Appian Way, it nevertheless was a
worthy rival. The Aurelian Way followed up the coast through Etruria
and furnished another highway to Spain and Gaul. The Ostien highway
connected Rome with a splendid harbor at the mouth of the Tiber.
But the Appian Way was rightly the most famous of all; it was the
earliest made, it was perhaps the longest paved road, and it carried
the greatest amount of traffic. The road was built by Appius Claudius
Caecus--then a Roman Censor, afterwards a Consul, from whom it takes
its name--to Capua, a distance of 142 miles. Later it was extended
across the Apennine Mountains through Beneventum, Venusia, and
Tarentum, to Brundisium, a port on the Adriatic Sea, in the heel of the
boot, a total distance of 350 miles. The improvements of Appius were
begun in the year 312 B.C., and carried out at least as far as Capua.
Livy speaks of a road over part of this way some thirty-five years
earlier. A portion outside the walls was paved with lava (silex) in 189
B.C., and during the reign of Trajan (A.D. 98-117) the Via Appia was
paved from Capua to Brundisium (Niebuhr). From Brundisium (Brindis)
traffic could be carried by ship to Dyrrhacium and thence over the
Via Egnatio to Macedonia and the Bosphorus; or along the coast to the
Grecian towns, to the cities of the Far East and to Egypt. Many are the
references to the noted highway in literature; Milton, in “Paradise
Regained,” book four, bids us to watch flocking to the city, enriched
with spoils, proconsuls, embassies, legions, in “various habits on the
Appian road.”

“What a cosmopolitan throng must have graced that highway in the
first century,” says Dr. Carroll.[11] “Thick-lipped Ethiopians with
rings in noses and ears, swarthy-browed turbaned Mesopotamians,
haughty Parthians, burnoosed Arabs still worshiping their polygods,
hook-nosed Hebrews, carven with the humility of the despised rich,
Greek Pedagogues and Rhetors and Tutors, togaed senators, white-clad
vestals with modest faces, and painted harlots with amber hair. Lictors
clearing the way with rods for some purple clad dignitary of Nero’s
court and carrying the fasces and the ax; street merchants and hawkers
of small wares, slaves scantily clad, stark bemuscled gladiators,
_Cives_ and _Peregrini_, citizens and strangers, displaying, in
varying degree, arrogance and curiosity; long yellow-haired Germans,
their faces smeared with ocher and their yellow hair with oil;
kilted soldiers with long spears and short broad swords; beggars
(the lazzaroni of that bygone age), pathetically sullen or volubly
mendicant in the sunshine lecticae; couches carried by bearers
containing pampered nobles or high-born ladies; the cisium and the
_rhoda meritoria_; the carriage and the hack of that time crossing each
other’s path in the narrow road; children naked and joyous; merchants
on caparisoned asses; the swinging columns of the legionaries; brown,
straight-featured Egyptians. For part of the distance a canal runs
parallel and travelers have their choice to take the pavement or to
ride in state on painted barges dragged by mules; on the pavement a
Pontifex in his robes of office and Augurs exchanging cynical smiles;
the rattle of chariot wheels and some haggard-eyed noble, redolent from
the warm and scented bath, with flower-crowned brow, drives in furious
guise along the Appian Way, while barbarian and Scythian, bond and
free, yield the way before him.”

[Illustration: MAP OF ROMAN ROADS IN ENGLAND

(After Jackman: “Development of Transportation in Modern England.”)]

Davis[12] tells us that the Roman road system after it had become
a network over Italy began to spread over the whole Empire. That
admirable highways were built by peaceful legionaries for commercial
purposes--and that even to-day in North Africa and in the wilds of Asia
Minor where travelers seldom penetrate may be found the Roman road with
its hard stones laid on a solid foundation. He further states that as
a consequence of these roads commerce expanded by leaps and bounds. A
great trade passing down the Red Sea sprang up with India, reaching
to the coast of Ceylon, returning with pearls, rare tapestries, and
spices. Another set penetrated Arabia for much-desired incense, or
unto the heart of Africa for ivory. Also with such merchandising there
came a money system with banks, checks and bonds rivaling those of
the present day. The bridges are an important part of any road. Those
across the Tiber in Rome were regarded as sacred. They were cared for
by a special body of Priests called _pontifaces_ (bridge-makers).
The name Pontifex Maximus was borne by the High Priest and became a
designation for the emperor; it is now applied to the Pope as the
highest authority in the papal or pontifical state.


=Pre-historic American Roads.=--When America was discovered it was
sparsely settled with tribes of semi-civilized peoples. The ordinary
aborigine was in the hunting and fishing stage, just beginning to
cultivate crops. True, tribes claimed regions and attempted by force
to keep other tribes from trespassing thereon. They had no literature
save perhaps a few rough diagrams or drawings. There was no trade or
commerce and consequently no roads except mere trails. Their methods
of transportation consisted in walking or in paddling canoes. In the
making and operating of canoes and of weapons of warfare and of the
chase they were most advanced.

In many parts of the country there had been a civilization, but so long
ago no very authentic knowledge of its character can be predicated
upon the mounds, utensils, and other evidence now remaining. The Mound
Builders and the Cliff Dwellers are as yet to us unknown peoples.

In Mexico, Central America,[13] and Peru a much higher civilization
prevailed. Especially in Peru where a very high state of agriculture
was in vogue. There is even evidence of a considerable degree of Art
and Literature.[14] Many of the remains remind one of early Egyptian
and Persian temples and roads, but perhaps no more lucid description of
the ancient Peruvian roads and transportation exists than that given in
Prescott’s justly celebrated classic, “The Conquest of Peru.” Slightly
abridged it reads thus:

  Those who may distrust the accounts of Peruvian industry will find
  their doubts removed on a visit to the country. The traveler still
  meets, especially in the central regions of the tableland, with
  memorials of the past, remains of temples, palaces, fortresses,
  terraced mountains, great military roads, aqueducts, and other public
  works, which, whatever degree of science they may display in their
  execution, astonish him by their number, the massive character of the
  materials, and the grandeur of the design. Among them, perhaps the
  most remarkable are the great roads, the broken remains of which are
  still in sufficient preservation to attest their former magnificence.
  There were many of these roads, traversing different parts of the
  kingdom: but the most considerable were the two which extended from
  Quito to Cuzco, and, again diverging from the capital, continued in a
  southerly direction toward Chili.

  One of these roads passed over the great plateau, and the other along
  the lowlands on the borders of the ocean. The former was much the
  more difficult achievement, from the character of the country. It was
  conducted over pathless sierras buried in snow; galleries were cut
  for leagues through the living rock; rivers were crossed by means
  of bridges that swung suspended in the air; precipices were scaled
  by stairways hewn out of the native bed; ravines of hideous depths
  were filled up with solid masonry; in short, all the difficulties
  that beset a wild and mountainous region, and which might appall
  the most courageous engineer of modern times, were encountered and
  successfully overcome. The length of the road, of which scattered
  fragments only remain, is variously estimated at from fifteen hundred
  to two thousand miles; and stone pillars, in the manner of European
  milestones, were erected at stated intervals of somewhat more than
  a league, all along the route. Its breadth scarcely exceeded twenty
  feet. It was built of heavy flags of freestone, and, in some parts
  at least, covered with a bituminous cement, which time has made
  harder than the stone itself. In some places where the ravines had
  been filled up with masonry, the mountain torrents, wearing on it
  for ages, have gradually eaten away through the base, and left the
  superincumbent mass--such is the cohesion of the materials--still
  spanning the valley like an arch.

  Over some of the boldest streams it was necessary to construct
  suspension bridges, as they are termed, made of the tough fibers
  of the maguey, or of the osier of the country, which has an
  extraordinary degree of tenacity and strength. These osiers were
  woven into cables of the thickness of a man’s body. The huge ropes,
  then stretched across the water, were conducted through rings or
  holes cut in immense buttresses of stone raised on the opposite banks
  of the river and then secured to heavy pieces of timber. Several of
  these enormous cables bound together formed a bridge which, covered
  with planks, well secured and defended by a railing of the same osier
  materials on the sides, afforded a safe passage for the traveler.
  The length of this aerial bridge, sometimes exceeding two hundred
  feet, caused it, confined as it was only at the extremities, to dip
  with an alarming inclination towards the center, while the motion
  given to it by the passenger occasioned an oscillation still more
  frightful, as his eye wandered over the dark abyss of waters that
  foamed and tumbled many fathoms beneath. Yet these light and fragile
  fabrics were crossed without fear by the Peruvians, and are still
  retained by the Spaniards over those streams which, from the depth or
  impetuosity of the current, would seem impracticable for the usual
  modes of conveyance. The wider and more tranquil waters were crossed
  on balsas--a kind of raft still much used by the natives--to which
  sails were attached, furnishing the only instance of this higher kind
  of navigation among the American Indians.

  The other great road of the Incas lay through the level country
  between the Andes and the ocean. It was constructed in a different
  manner, as demanded by the nature of the ground, which was for the
  most part low, and much of it sandy. The causeway was raised on a
  high embankment of earth, and defended on either side by a parapet
  or wall of clay; and trees and odoriferous shrubs were planted along
  the margin, regaling the senses of the traveler with their perfumes,
  and refreshing him by their shades, so grateful under the burning
  sky of the tropics. In the strips of sandy waste which occasionally
  intervened, where the light and volatile soil was incapable of
  sustaining a road, huge piles, many of them to be seen at this day,
  were driven into the ground to indicate the route to the traveler.

  All along these highways, caravansaries, or tambos, as they were
  called, were erected, at the distance of ten or twelve miles from
  each other, for the accommodation, more particularly of the Inca and
  his suite and those who journeyed on the public business. There
  were few other travelers in Peru. Some of these buildings were on
  an extensive scale, consisting of a fortress, barracks, and other
  military works, surrounded by a parapet of stone and covering a large
  tract of ground. These were evidently destined for the accommodation
  of the imperial armies when on their march across the country. The
  care of the great roads was committed to the districts through
  which they passed, and under the Incas a large number of hands was
  constantly employed to keep them in repair. This was the more easily
  done in the country where the mode of traveling was altogether on
  foot; though the roads are said to be so nicely constructed that a
  carriage might have rolled over them as securely as on any of the
  great roads of Europe. Still in a region where the elements of fire
  and water are both actively at work in the business of destruction,
  they must, without constant supervision, have gradually gone to
  decay. Such has been their fate under the Spanish conquerors, who
  took no care to enforce the admirable system for their preservation
  adopted by the Incas. Yet the broken portions that still survive here
  and there, like the fragments of the great Roman roads scattered over
  Europe, bear evidence to their primitive grandeur, and have drawn
  forth the eulogium from a discriminating traveler, usually not too
  profuse in his panegyric, that “the roads of the Incas were among the
  most useful and stupendous works ever executed by man.”

  The system of communication through their dominions was still further
  improved by the Peruvian sovereigns by the introduction of posts,
  in the same manner as was done by the Aztecs. The Peruvian posts,
  however, established on all the great routes that conducted to the
  capital, were on a much more extended plan than those in Mexico. All
  along these routes, small buildings were erected, at the distance of
  less than five miles asunder, in each of which a number of runners,
  or chasquis, as they were called, were stationed to carry forward the
  dispatches of government. These dispatches were either verbal, or
  conveyed by means of quipus, and sometimes accompanied by a thread
  of the crimson fringe worn round the temples of the Inca, which was
  regarded with the same implicit deference as the signet-ring of an
  Oriental despot.

  The chasquis were dressed in a peculiar livery, intimating their
  profession. They were all trained to the employment and selected
  for their speed and fidelity. As the distance each courier had to
  perform was small, and as he had ample time to refresh himself at the
  stations, they ran over the ground with great swiftness, and messages
  were carried through the whole extent of the long routes, at the rate
  of one hundred and fifty miles a day. The office of the chasquis was
  not limited to carrying dispatches. They frequently brought various
  articles for the use of the court and in this way fish from the
  distant ocean, fruits, game, and different commodities from the hot
  regions on the coast, were taken to the capital in good condition,
  and served fresh at the royal table. It is remarkable that this
  important institution should have been known to both the Mexicans and
  the Peruvians without any correspondence with one another and that it
  should have been found among two barbarian nations of the New World
  long before it was introduced among the civilized nations of Europe.

  By these wise contrivances of the Incas, the most distant parts of
  the long extended empire of Peru were brought into intimate relations
  with each other. The while the capitals of Christendom, but a few
  hundred miles apart, remained as far asunder as if seas had rolled
  between them, the great capitals Cuzco and Quito were placed by the
  high roads of the Incas in immediate correspondence. Intelligence
  from the numerous provinces was transmitted on the wings of the wind
  to the Peruvian metropolis, the great focus to which all the lines
  of communication converged. Not an insurrectionary movement could
  occur, not an invasion on the remotest frontier, before the tidings
  were conveyed to the capital and the imperial armies were on their
  march across the magnificent roads of the country to suppress it. So
  admirable was the machinery contrived by the American despots for
  maintaining tranquillity throughout their dominions! It may remind us
  of the similar institutions of ancient Rome, when, under the Caesars,
  she was mistress of half the world.

Hiram Bingham, Director of the Geographic Society-Yale Peruvian
Expedition[15] gives an interesting description of the tracing out of
two of these old roads. Evidently the trail was mostly used by foot
passengers, or possibly llamas, for there were frequently steep grades
and flights of steps and open ravines which had more than likely been
crossed by the osier suspension bridges. No doubt much commerce beside
fertilizer from the great nitrate beds was carried on over these roads.


=Conclusion.=--If the story, very briefly given, of these old roads
does not verify the thesis that transportation is a measure of
civilization, a view might be taken of the tribes and peoples now
living in the various parts of the earth. If the character of the
transportation of the tribes of Africa and of Asia, of the Arctic and
Antarctic regions, the least civilized now known, be compared with
that of those nations considered most civilized, the same general
conclusion would be drawn. Compare the railways, canals, highways,
cars, automobiles, ships, and aircraft of the present-day United States
with the pack animals and ox-carts of many less favored nations and
the further evidence of amount of traffic and travel per person, will
be unnecessary to establish the relative states of civilization. It
is not necessary even to go beyond the confines of the great American
Republic. Writers who traveled through it in the ’forties, ’fifties
and ’sixties are wont to call attention to the uncouthness of the
inhabitants, to the lack of the refinements of speech and manners
characterizing those who dwelt in the more populous communities. But
the honesty, integrity, generosity, willingness, and ability of the
American pioneers to dare and to do, were unquestioned. It is a pity
that many of the best traits of humanity disappear when people are
crowded into cities, when their wants and desires are increased, when
the refinements of civilization have replaced the ruggedness of pioneer
life. Then, as now, upon the action of a bare majority, which in a
republic is called “the will of the people,” often hung the political,
social and financial destiny of the nation. A slight change would have
changed the course of civilizing evolution; who knows whether for good
or ill. As the _trivium_ and _quadrivium_ were the roads, believed by
the ancients to lead to a liberal education, so the government and the
civilization of this now great nation has rested consecutively in its
upward progress, upon the slender path of the aborigine, swelled to
the well defined trail of the pack-train, broadened into the cart and
wagon road, cast up into a turnpike; and upon the rippling trace of the
light canoe, the dugout, the keel-boat, the pole-boat, the flat-boat,
the canal-boat and the steam-boat; all to be supplanted by the thunder
of the locomotive. What in the process of evolution will follow it? The
automobile, the truck, the flying machine? Time alone can tell.


SELECTED REFERENCES

  DAVIS, WILLIAM STEARNS, “The Influence of Wealth on Imperial Rome,”
  pp. 85-105. The Macmillan Company, New York.

  ELY, RICHARD T., “Outlines of Economics,” The Macmillan Co., New
  York. Chapter III.

  Encyclopaedia Britannica. Articles on the “Steam Engine,” “Yarn,”
  “Weaving,” and “Railway.”

  GREEN, JOHN RICHARD, “History of the English People,” Book IX,
  Chapter III.

  HAVELL, H. L., “Republican Rome,” p. 112, Harrap & Co., London, 1914.

  HEITLAND, W. E., “The Roman Republic,” University Press, Cambridge.

  LIVY, TITUS, “History of Rome,” Translated by William A. M’Devitte,
  Book IX, Chap. 29; XXII, 15; XXIV, 8; George Bell & Sons, London,
  1890.

  MACAULAY, THOMAS BABINGTON, “The History of England,” Vol. I, Chapter
  III.

  MOMMSEN, PROFESSOR THEODOR, “The History of the Roman Republic,”
  Abridgment by Bryans and Hendy, pp. 95, 97, 98, 108, 175, 219, 251,
  318, 319, 320. Charles Scribner’s Sons, New York, 1893.

  MORLEY, S. T., “Excavations at Quirigua, Guatemala,” _The National
  Geographic Magazine_, March, 1913.

  Account of explorations made in Peru by a joint expedition of Yale
  University and The National Geographic Society in _The National
  Geographic Magazine_, April, 1913, February, 1915, and May, 1916.

  NIEBUHR, B. G., “Lectures on Ancient History,” Vol. III, p. 156;
  “Lectures on the History of Rome,” Vol. III, p. 229. Taylor, Walton &
  Maberly, London, 1852.

  OSBORN, HENRY F., “Men of the Old Stone Age.” C. Scribner’s Sons, New
  York, 1915.

  PRESCOTT, WILLIAM H., “Conquest of Peru,” 2 Vol., Vol. I, pp. 62-67,
  J. B. Lippincott & Co., Philadelphia, 1869.

  SANDS, W. F., “Mysterious Temples of the Jungle,” in _The National
  Geographic Magazine_, March, 1913.

  SELFRIDGE, H. GORDON, “The Romance of Commerce,” John Lane, London.

  STANLEY, HENRY M., “In Darkest Africa” (two volumes). C. Scribner’s
  Sons, New York.


FOOTNOTES

  [1] “Outlines of Economics,” by Richard T. Ely. The Macmillan Co., N.
  Y.

  [2] See “The Man of the Stone Age,” by H. F. Osborne.

  [3] “In Darkest Africa” (two volumes), by Henry M. Stanley. Charles
  Scribner’s Sons, New York.

  [4] “The Romance of Commerce,” by H. Gordon Selfridge. John Lane,
  London.

  [5] Quoted by Ely in “Outlines of Economics.” Macmillan, New York.

  [6] “The History of England,” by Thomas Babington Macaulay, Chapter
  III.

  [7] “History of the English People,” by John Richard Green, Paragraph
  1527.

  [8] It is well to note that Watt in his application for a patent on
  steam engines granted in 1769 also laid claim for a rotary engine.
  The rotary engine has been lately developed into the steam turbine.

  [9] “Germany and Austria-Hungary were increasingly convinced that in
  the further disintegration of the old Turkish Empire they must be
  recognized in an exceptional way and must be allowed ... to acquire
  an undisputed influence from the Adriatic to the Black Sea and the
  Persian Gulf.”--Albert Shaw in the introduction to Simonds’ “History
  of the World War.” Also see map Vol. II, p. 346.

  [10] From the report of a lecture at Shreveport, La., 1905, by B. H.
  Carroll, Professor of History, Baylor University, Waco, Texas.

  [11] Lecture delivered at Shreveport, La., by B. H. Carroll, Ph.D.,
  Professor of History, Baylor University, Waco, Texas, later U. S.
  Consul at Naples.

  [12] “The Influence of Wealth in Imperial Rome,” by William Stearns
  Davis, The Macmillan Company, N. Y., pp. 95-105.

  [13] See “Mysterious Temples of the Jungle,” by W. F. Sands, and
  “Excavations at Quirigua, Guatemala” by S. T. Morley. _The National
  Geographic Magazine_, March, 1913.

  [14] See several excellent articles with illustrations on the
  explorations made in Peru by a joint expedition of Yale University
  and The National Geographic Society in _The National Geographic
  Magazine_, April, 1913, February, 1915, and May, 1916.

  [15] _Geographic Magazine_, May, 1916.




CHAPTER II

TRANSPORTATION DEVELOPMENT IN THE UNITED STATES; EARLY TRAILS AND ROADS


The early settlements of this country were made upon the shores,
naturally, because the settlers were brought by ships from Europe and
supplies of various sorts were from time to time renewed by ships. The
settlers were not skilled in the art of living on the country as were
the natives and when supply vessels failed to put in their appearance
there was real hardship in and sometimes entire extermination of the
colonists. The penetration of settlement to the interior was slow and
even to times within the memory of men now living much of the interior
was an unknown wilderness.


=The Birch Bark Canoe.=--Travel from place to place was at first
insignificant and what little there was was carried on by walking,
horseback riding, or by boat. Settlement, which had begun on the ocean
or at the head of ocean navigation on inlets or rivers, was eventually
pushed farther inland. The rivers and other waterways being at hand
were utilized; the birch-bark canoe, the dugout, and the plank boat,
furnished the principal vehicles of transportation. The Indians were
very expert in the manufacture and operation of light birch-bark
canoes. Longfellow in “Hiawatha” gives a poetical description of this:

    With his knife the tree he girdled;
    Just beneath its lowest branches,
    Just above the roots he cut it,
    Till the sap came oozing outward;
    Down the trunk from top to bottom,
    Sheer he cleft the bark asunder,
    With a wooden wedge he raised it
    Stripped it from the trunk unbroken.

Then he explains how the framework is made of cedar:

    Like two bows he framed and shaped them,
    Like two bended bows together.

After which they were tied together and the bark fastened to the frame
by fibrous roots of the larch, then Hiawatha

    Took the resin of the fir tree
    Smeared therewith each seam and fissure,
    Made each crevice safe from water.

The aborigine paddled this frail bark so skillfully that the noise of
rowing was scarcely audible or the waves visible. And when he came to
the headwaters of the stream he was able to raise the light craft above
his head and follow the dim trail across the lower lying hills to the
stream beyond the water-shed leading in the opposite direction.

The white man, profiting by the Red Man’s experience learned to
build these boats, as well as heavier ones of logs and timber
for transporting goods, and utilized the same trails to push his
civilization farther into the unknown.


=Meagerness of Early Roads.=--In the “History of Travel”[16] Mr. Dunbar
quotes from a document in the New York Historical Society’s collection,
written by Benjamin Fletcher, Governor of His Majesty’s Province of New
York, and dated 1694, which shows the lack of roadways or even passable
trails in northern New York: “It is impossible to march with any party
of men to Canada by Land, either in winter or summer, but they must
passe a Considerable Part of ye way over ye Lake, ye land on each side
being extream steep and Rocky mountains or els a meer cumbered with
underwood, where men can not goe upright, but must creep throu Bushes
for whole days’ marches, and impossible for horses to goe at any time
of ye year.”

The same author quotes from a letter by Deputy Governor Hinkley of
Plymouth Colony, about 1680, asking the English Government for favors
because this Colony was “the first that broke the ice, and underwent
ye brunt, at our own charge, for the enlargement of his Majestie’s
dominions in this heretofore most howling wilderness, amidst wild
Indians and wild beasts.”

In Massachusetts,[17] on the other hand, it is stated that while
communication was usually by water one writer boasts that “the wild and
uncouth woods were filled with frequented ways and the large rivers
were overlaid with bridges, passable both for horse and foot.” But
notwithstanding this it was probably not before the beginning of the
sixteenth century that any very serious attempts were made even to
widen the trails so that wagon traffic was possible. In 1754[18] four
days were needed to go from Boston to New York by stage, and three days
more to go to Philadelphia. Twelve years later it required the “Flying
Machine” two days to make the trip between New York and Philadelphia.


=Settlement Follows Waterways; Portages.=--The opening up for
settlement of new territory necessitated means of communication. That
near waterways was most easily reached and most easily kept within
reach of older settlements and was, therefore, naturally first taken up
and occupied. To penetrate farther the interior made it necessary to
cross from one water system to another. As necessity arose the trails
were widened into roads and often at these portages were established
forts and villages for protection against the natives and to facilitate
trade. Villages grew into towns and towns into cities. Portages became
known and were talked about just as railroad lines were later.[19] To
go from the region near New York the Hudson River was available to the
watershed near Lake George, where there was a 15-mile portage guarded
by Forts Edward on the Hudson and William Henry on Lake George. After
traversing Lake George there was another portage to Lake Champlain
guarded by Fort Ticonderoga. These names are often mentioned in the
histories of the French and Indian and of the Revolutionary wars.
[Illustration: MAP OF THE NORTH-EASTERN PORTION OF THE UNITED STATES
SHOWING PORTAGES

Showing the Location of Well-known Portages. There Were Other Portages
Wherever Two Water Courses Came Near to Each Other. (See Farrand:
“American Nation,” Vol. I, and Thwaites, Ib. Vol. VII.)]

The Oneida portage, leading from the Mohawk, a tributary of the Hudson,
to Wood Creek thence by the Oswego River furnished a way to Ontario and
the other Great Lakes. A portage around Niagara Falls is now supplanted
by the Welland Canal.


=Lines of Travel.=--To reach the Ohio Valley travelers might go by
way of the north along the routes just mentioned to the Great Lakes,
thence to the interior of Ohio, or they could leave the Mohawk and
portage across to the upper waters of the Allegheny. The Indians gave
trouble along these lines, so a more southerly route was often taken.
Some of these, commencing on the north, were: Up the Susquehanna to
its headwaters, portage to one or the other of tributaries which flow
into the Allegheny near Kittanning; leave the Susquehanna and go up the
Juniata and portage over to the Conemaugh, thence to the Allegheny--a
course partly occupied now by the Pennsylvania railroad; or, by way
of the Potomac, and Wills Creek, then across the Youghiogheny, and
Monongahela. Several other trails crossed the Alleghanies. A trail
through southern Pennsylvania called occasionally Nemacolin’s Path
afterward formed the line of Braddock’s Road, hastily constructed for
military purposes during the French and Indian War, and over which
Braddock’s unfortunate expedition traveled. Still farther south there
was a well-known trail often followed by the Cherokee Indians, by
trappers, hunters, traders, and missionaries desirous of reaching the
lands beyond the mountains. Skirting the north end of the Blue Ridge
range the traveler followed up the Shenandoah to near the present
town of Staunton, thence across the ridges to the headwaters of the
James, thence to upper tributaries of the New River, then by crossing
a few more ridges to the Holston River, thence into the bountiful
hunting grounds of Tennessee. The Cherokee Indians were jealous of
this territory and as far as possible kept it closed to the settler.
Therefore the country beyond the Alleghanies was not well known to the
Virginia colonists, even up to 1800. True, records of Dougherty, a
trader, who had visited the Indian tribes in this region as early as
1690 were known, and another (Adair) in 1730, and still others after
1740. Glowing reports were brought back by the few traders, hunters,
trappers, and occasional talkative Indians, who had visited those
regions of magnificent rivers, vast woods, and extended prairies. The
wild beasts with which this fertile country abounded were likened to
the leaves on the trees, they were so abundant. Even the great Ohio
River was but a tributary of a larger river of which they had no
definite information. The trip, in the language of the Indian, from the
headwaters of the Holston (Hogo higee) to the Wabash (Ohio) required
for its performance “two paddles, two warriors, three moons.”[20]
These glowing descriptions only whetted the adventurous appetite and
soon such hardy pioneers as Daniel Boone and his comrades sought this
territory where they could live near to nature and be freed from high
taxes. There was also a well-worn trail from Philadelphia, east of
the Cherokee (Shenandoah) through Virginia to the Yadkin, from which
travelers could diverge at various points and reach the Cherokee trail
or go on through Cumberland Gap farther to the west.


=Trails from the North.=--Traders from Virginia who reached far out in
Tennessee and Kentucky found competition from those who came down by
one of the several routes from the Great Lakes or up from the lower
Mississippi. A route left Lake Erie at what is now Cleveland, passed
up the Cuyahoga, portaged across to a tributary of the Ohio, then
into Kentucky; another left the Lake at Sandusky, followed the Miami,
crossed to the Scioto, thence down to the Ohio, across Kentucky to
Cumberland Gap, sometimes called the Scioto trail and farther south the
Warrior’s Trail.

As western territory settled, trails and roads became more numerous.
Readers desiring further detailed information are referred to Hurlbert,
Thwaites, Dunbar, and Farrand.[21] A few other routes, however,
should be mentioned on account of the importance they assumed in the
settlement of the nation.


=Boone’s Trace, or The Wilderness Road.=--This road is said to be the
first road built into the wilderness for the purpose of encouraging
settlement and development. In the late years of the nineteenth century
it was no uncommon thing for a railroad to precede settlement, but at
the beginning of the eighteenth century roads were, in America, made
largely for military purposes or where demanded by the traffic of
earlier settlement.

Daniel Boone, the noted hunter and explorer, had several times left his
home in North Carolina to hunt and travel in the wilds of Kentucky. He
brought back to the eastern side of the mountains glowing descriptions.
These excited the cupidity of a friend, a judge and prominent citizen
of North Carolina, James[22] Henderson. Henderson employed Boone to
confer with the Cherokee Indians who claimed this territory for the
sale of their rights. Boone sought out the Indians and by means now
unknown got them to agree to sell. The fact that they were persuaded
to dispose of their great hunting grounds shows what influence Boone
had among them. It has been intimated that the chiefs realized the
futility of further fighting the white settler or that the Cherokees
felt they had no real right to this land as it had been rather held as
neutral territory among several tribes. However, as soon as they had
given their pledge Boone is said to have gone immediately to Henderson,
who repaired at once to Fort Watauga on a branch of the Holston in
North Carolina, where he met 1200 natives in council and completed
the deal in the name of the Transylvania Company. The main opposition
came from an eloquent and powerful chief named Dragging Canoe,[23] who
was able to disrupt proceedings the first day. After his speech the
council broke up in confusion. The next day, however, the Indians again
went into council and the treaty was ratified. Estimates of the price
paid range from “ten wagon loads of cheap goods and whiskey,” to “the
equivalent of ten thousand pounds sterling.”[24]

As soon as the deal was consummated Boone, employed by Henderson, began
the marking and cutting out of a road from Watauga, North Carolina, to
Boonesborough, Kentucky. The party numbered about forty men, consisting
of colored men to care for the camp duties and the necessary pack
animals and a body of woodsmen with axes. Boone went ahead and blazed
the way by chopping notches in the sides of trees along the way, the
axmen following cleared away the underbrush and felled and removed such
trees as stood in the way. However, as it was easier to detour than to
chop, usually only small trees were cut. It was not intended that this
should be a wagon road, as wagons had but just made their appearance in
this region. However, it was to be an easily followed way for future
settlers. In Boone’s Autobiography, dictated to John Filson, the matter
of the road is referred to thus:

  After the conclusion of which (a campaign against the Shawanese
  Indians which Boone commanded by order of Governor Dunmore), the
  militia was discharged from each garrison, and I, being relieved from
  my post, was solicited by a number of North Carolina gentlemen, that
  were about purchasing the lands lying on the north side of Kentucky
  River, from the Cherokee Indians, to attend their treaty at Wataga,
  in March, 1755, to negotiate with them, and mention the boundaries
  of the purchase. This I accepted; and, at the request of the same
  gentlemen, undertook to mark out a road in the best passage from the
  settlement through the wilderness to Kentucky, with such assistance
  as I thought necessary to employ for such an important undertaking.

  I soon began this work, having collected a number of enterprising
  men, well armed. We proceeded with all possible expedition until we
  came within fifteen miles of where Boonesborough now stands, and
  where we were fired upon by a party of Indians, that killed two, and
  wounded two of our number; yet, although surprised and taken at a
  disadvantage, we stood our ground. This was the 20th of March, 1775.
  Three days after, we were fired upon again, and had two men killed
  and three wounded. Afterwards we proceeded on to Kentucky River
  without opposition; and on the 1st of April began to erect the fort
  of Boonesborough at a salt lick, about sixty yards from the river on
  the south side.

A letter from Captain Boone to Colonel Henderson is quoted by Peck
in his life of Boone, relating to this same enterprise, which shows
the dangerous nature of the work and that even Boone seemed somewhat
worried over the matter:

  Dear Colonel: After my compliments to you, I shall acquaint you with
  our misfortune. On March the 25th a party of Indians fired on my
  company about half an hour before day, and killed Mr. Twitty and his
  negro, and wounded Mr. Walker very deeply but I hope he will recover.

  On March the 28th, as we were hunting for provisions, we found Samuel
  Tate’s son, who gave us an account that the Indians fired on their
  camp on the 27th day. My brother and I went down and found two men
  killed and scalped, Thomas McDowell and Jeremiah McPeters. I have
  sent a man down to all the lower companies in order to gather them
  all to the mouth of Otter Creek. My advice to you, sir, is to come or
  send as soon as possible. Your company is desired greatly, for the
  people are very uneasy, but are willing to stay and venture their
  lives with you; and now is the time to flusterate their (the Indians)
  intentions, and keep the country whilst we are in it. If we give way
  to them now, it will ever be the case. This day we start from the
  battle-ground for the mouth of Otter Creek, where we will immediately
  erect a fort, which will be done before you can come or send; then
  we can send ten men to meet you if you send for them.

  I am sir, your most obedient,

  DANIEL BOONE.

  N. B.--We stood on the ground and guarded our baggage till day, and
  lost nothing. We have about fifteen miles to Cantuck at Otter Creek.

The road began “at the settlements,” which were probably in what are
now Sullivan and Hawkins counties. Tennessee, but mostly along the
Watauga River, then thought to be a part of Virginia. The road was a
continuation of the Cherokee trail through the mountains. This trail
served the great migration following the Revolutionary War in Tennessee
and Kentucky. From the settlements there is a westerly course to the
Holston River at Long Island near the site of old Long Island Fort
constructed by Colonel Bird to winter his army during the French and
Indian War in 1758. At this place he received some reinforcements and
then continued in a generally westward direction through country he
was more or less familiar with to the Clinch River, then across the
ridge to the Powell River, and finally to Cumberland Gap, through which
he entered the land of “Kentucke.” Here he arrived at the Warrior’s
Trail leading northward, so called because Kentucky had been a sort
of neutral hunting grounds of the Indians from the North, the Miamis,
Shawnees, Wyandots, and others and of the Cherokees, Creeks, Catawbas,
and others, from the South. Nevertheless the Indians from the South
habitually crossed over and fought those from the North and vice versa,
hence a large and much frequented trail.

[Illustration: MAP SHOWING MAIN HIGHWAYS AND WATERWAYS IN UNITED STATES
ABOUT 1830

When the Railroads Entered the Industrial Arena, the Country Was Being
Covered With a Net Work of Highways. (Based on Tanner’s Map of 1825 and
Turner in “American Nation,” Vol. XIV.)]

Boone appropriated this native route for a distance of about 50 miles
to near the present town of Manchester in Clay County. Here he found
a “street” made by the buffalo, which were wont to travel through the
cane-brakes about five or six abreast, thus with their thousands of
hoofs breaking and hardening a way wide enough for a team and wagon.
Turning west he followed the bisons’ street to Rock Castle River,
then turned northward again to the Kentucky River and the site of
Boonesborough. A fort was here erected by placing stout log cabins with
heavy stockades between about a rectangular space some 150 x 260 feet.
A pair of strong wooden gates furnished ingress and egress. Several
times was this fort attacked by Indians, the last time in 1778, by
nearly 500 warriors, but always, because of the block houses at the
corners with their loop-holes and the heavy barricades, also with loop
holes, they were able to withstand the attacks and finally repulse the
Indians.

The first legislature of the Transylvania Republic, as Henderson’s
scheme came to be known, was held here. Boone was a member, as was
Harrod from Harrodstown, and other early settlers of Kentucky.

There is no doubt but that this highway and blockhouse fort were of
great assistance in settling and developing the country of Kentucke.


=Calk’s Diary.=--One of the first parties to make use of Boone’s Trace
was that of Henderson in response to Boone’s letter heretofore quoted.
A naïve diary kept by one of its members, William Calk, is still in
existence. It has been made available by the publications of the
Filson Club. Speed[25] and Dunbar[26] quote it extensively. Theodore
(afterward President) Roosevelt[27] says “the writer’s mind was
evidently as vigorous as his language was terse and untrammeled.” While
spelling, capitalization, and punctuation may not conform to the best
modern style it must be remembered that in those early days there were
no public schools. A few private schools were taught by more or less
shiftless school teachers, but the man who could read and write at all
was fortunate. Boone’s schooling, of a very meager nature, closed when
he and some of his schoolmates exchanged the teacher’s whisky bottle
for a similar one doped with tartar emetic. The sick teacher made a
“rough house” with Boone and his companions but was finally knocked
down and the school dismissed.

To return to William Calk’s diary. It is a sort of log or running
account of the trip and events from day to day as they impressed
him, from its beginning March 13, 1775, in Prince William County,
Virginia, till he arrives at Boonesborough. It is certainly a very good
commentary on the early travel conditions. A few of the entries are:

  1775, Mon. 13th--I set out from prince wm. to travel to Caintuck on
  tursday Night our company all got together at Mr. Priges on rapadon
  which was Abraham hanks phipip Drake Eanock Smith Robert Whitledge
  and myself thiar Abrahms Dogs leg got broke by Drakes Dog.

  Wednesday, 15th--We started early from priges made a good days travel
  and lodge this night at Mr. Cars on North fork James River.

So he continues with his daily items. It may be interesting to note that

  Wedns 22nd--We start early and git to foart Chissel whear we git some
  good loaf bread and good whiskey.

On “fryday 24th” they turned out of the main wagon road in order to
go to “Danil Smiths” on the Clinch River, where they arrived Saturday
evening and very hard traveling they found it through the mountains.
Those who have had experience with pack animals in the timber will
relish this incident which occurred soon after the few days’ sojourn at
Smith’s.

  Thusd 30th--We set out again and went down to Elk gardin and there
  suplid our Selves With Seed Corn and irish tators then we went on a
  little way I turned my hors to drive before me and he got scard ran
  away threw Down the Saddle Bags and broke three of our powder goards
  and Abrams beast Burst open a walet of corn and lost a good Deal and
  made a turrable flustration amongst the Reast of the Horses Drakes
  mair run against a sapling and nocht it down we cacht them all again
  and went on and loged at John Duncans.

They “suplyed” themselves with bacon and meal at “Dunkan’s.” This was
their last chance to get provisions other than the game afforded by
the country. They found this a “verey Bad hilley way.” Were mired in
the mud, fell in the water and got their loads wet. Since they turned
off to go to Smith’s they had been traveling unbroken or dim trails; on
“mond 3rd” after traveling the woods without any track they “git into
hendersons Road,” that is the trail which Boone had recently blazed
for the Transylvania Company. On “Tuesday 4th” they overtook “Col.
henderson and his company Bound for Caintuck,” at Capt. Martin’s where
“they were Broiling and Eating Beef without Bread.” They now formed a
company of about “40 men and some neagros.”

  Saturday 8th--We all pack up and started crost Cumberland gap about
  one oclock this Day. Met a good many peopel turned back for fear of
  the indians but our Company goes on Still with good courage.

News of the depredations of the Indians frightened many and caused them
to turn back. The Henderson party were able to pursuade some of these
to remain. On the 9th they met “another Companey going Back they tell
such News abram and Drake is afraid to go aney farther there we camp
this night.”

However, after many hardships, swollen streams over which they
must sometimes swim their horses, “obliged to toat” the packs over
themselves, they arrived at their destination. Once “Abrams mair Ran
into the River with her load and swam over” he followed her and “got
on her and made her swim back again.” He mentions occasionally Killing
game: one “Eavening two Deer,” another day a “beef,” and again “2
bofelos.” The writer was evidently disgusted with the uncleanly and
unsanitary Drake, whose dog is mentioned in the first entry, for he
notes that “Mr. Drake Bakes Bread without washing his hands,” which
evidently was unusual in even these frontier times.

After arriving at “Boones foart” they drew “for chois of lots;” some as
will always happen were dissatisfied. This small company, however, must
have decided to accept the verdict of chance for Calk writes:

  Wednesday 26th--We Begin Building us a house and a plaise of Defense
  to Keep the indians off this day we begin to live without bread.

  Satterday 29th--We git our house Kivered with Bark and move our
  things into it at Night and Bigin houseKeeping Eanock Smith Robert
  Whitledge and myself.

Thus ends this interesting journal kept under difficult conditions
when ordinary men would have considered it useless labor to make such
a record. There is no doubt but that Boone’s Wilderness Road and
Boone’s Fort were both very instrumental in the settlement of Kentucky
and Tennessee. The territory of Kentucky was separated from Virginia
in 1786 and admitted to the union as a state in 1790, when it had a
population, by U. S. Census, of 73,077.


=Marquette’s Explorations.=--Religious devotion and zeal has done much
for the settlement of North America: the Puritans in New England, the
Quakers in Pennsylvania, the Catholics in Maryland and Canada, and very
much later the Mormons in Utah are familiar examples. A French Jesuit
missionary, Jacques Marquette, who with another, Claude Bablon, had
founded (1668) a settlement at St. Mary’s on the falls between Lakes
Superior and Huron, said to be the first French settlement within the
present boundaries of the United States, had made friends with the
Illinois Indians and learned their language. He also collected the
remains of the Huron tribes at St. Ignace and established a mission
there (1671). Marquette had heard from the Indians many tales of the
Great river to the west, and decided to explore the region along its
borders, despite their assertion of great dangers, that its warriors
never spared the stranger, and that monsters would devour both men
and canoes. Traveling with his company up the Fox River from Green
Bay he crossed the portage, which still retains the name “Portage,”
to the headwaters of the Wisconsin. With the explorer Joliet and five
subordinates as companions, he boldly embarked upon the Wisconsin and
floated down its course, knowing not where it would lead nor what
dangers might be in store. After seven days of solitary travel they
floated with inexpressible joy on the broad bosom of the Mississippi,
June 17, 1673. They continued their lonely voyage along its placid
waters until they reached the mouth of the Moingona, where were seen
evidences of habitation. Fourteen miles in the interior was a native
village. They said they were received most friendly with a calumet,
invited into their dwellings, and feasted. They explained their
religious doctrines and were sent away with the gift of a calumet or
peace pipe embellished with the heads and necks of various colored
bright and beautiful birds.

They sailed along their solitary way and were soon rewarded by hearing
the rush of the swifter, more turbulent, muddy waters of the Missouri,
which seemed from thereon to enhance the speed of the current. They
went on past the mouths of the Ohio and the Arkansas, where they found
savages who spoke a new tongue and were armed with guns, proof that
they had trafficked with the Spaniards from the Gulf of Mexico, or
with the English from Virginia. These exhibiting hostility which was
only allayed by the peace pipe, they retreated and sailed back up the
river. When Marquette reached the Illinois he entered and ascended that
river where he beheld the magnificent fertility and coloring inuring
to the late summer and early autumn of the extensive plains and vast
wooded tracts of Illinois. An easy portage brought him to the Chicago
River, a short stream whose waters are now reversed and flow into the
Illinois. Some authorities claim Marquette to have been the first white
man to set foot upon the site of Chicago (1673). Others[28] state that
the French Jesuit Nicholas Perrot and his party of fur traders pitched
their tent on its prairies the latter part of 1669.

To Marquette, however, belongs the honor of discovering two very
important routes to the Mississippi Valley; the one by way of the
Fox and Wisconsin Rivers, and the other by way of the Illinois.
Unfortunately the hardships of this journey undermined his health and
the next year (1674) a half hour after he had retired for devotion to
a small altar of stones on the banks of a little stream now called by
his name, he was found dead. Thus judged by the extent and value of the
territory traversed, passed away, at the early age of thirty-one, one
of our country’s greatest explorers.


=The Lewis and Clark Expedition.=--Another exploring expedition sought
a path to extend the commerce of the United States in the far Oregon
country. The great Rocky Mountain ranges precluded direct approach. The
idea had evidently fastened itself upon Thomas Jefferson, even before
he became president, that the Missouri River might be made the highway
across the continent, and that trade and commerce thus engendered would
inure to the benefit of the country. Also being a highly educated man,
he was deeply interested in extending the geographical and biological
knowledge of this vast region even though no remuneration to the
nation might come therefrom. Furthermore, it is possible, he desired
to secure the territories beyond the Rockies as a part of the country,
but he was too shrewd to make plain statements to that effect. His
shrewdness and the business sagacity of Livingston, minister to France,
coupled with the financial straits of Napoleon resulted in obtaining
an extensive portion of the country without which the United States
could not have developed into a strong well-bound nation reaching from
coast to coast. Whether Mr. Jefferson would have attempted to take this
country by force matters not now. The fact that the Lewis and Clark
military expedition was ready to start almost as soon as the purchase
was made, lends suspicion to that idea. The nomination of Monroe to
be Minister to France, the man whom Jefferson expected to conduct the
Louisiana negotiations, and who arrived in France just in time to see
them completed by Livingston, was made January 11, 1803; while the
message proposing the expedition was submitted January 18; the treaty
of cession for the purchase was signed May 2; and during that same
month the expedition which had previously organized left its winter
quarters about a day’s journey from St. Louis, and proceeded up the
Missouri River. The expedition consisted of forty-five persons in three
boats, one a flat boat decked over at the ends and two pirogues[29]
together with a number of horses which were to be driven along the
bank for the use of the hunters. The personnel consisted of the two
officers, Captain Meriwether Lewis and Lieutenant (by courtesy Captain)
William Clark, both of whom were from families already distinguished
in border service; twenty-seven men who expected to make the entire
journey; seven soldiers and nine voyageurs who were to go only to the
Mandan villages of the Missouri, where the party would winter. Of the
twenty-seven permanent members one was a half-breed hunter who would
also act as interpreter, two were French voyageurs, and one a negro
servant of Clark. All, except the black slave, were enlisted in the
army that discipline might be secured. Their progress was necessarily
slow and a full account of it reads like a romance. They of course had
to live off the country as they proceeded. There was no roadway along
the river, often the brush was thick and the grass high; the river with
its turbulent waters, snags, and sand bars made navigation difficult;
flies and mosquitoes, those pests of bottom and marshy land, were
abundant. They had some trouble with the Sioux Indians, but Captains
Lewis and Clark were evidently able to cope with them successfully.
They reached a point near the present site of Bismarck, N.D., that
summer. This region was occupied by the Mandan Indians, who lived in
villages of rather permanent character. Among these they found some
who had traveled far toward the headwaters of the Missouri. One woman,
known as the Bird Woman, was especially helpful to them. She had been
captured some time previously from a mountain tribe and according
to Indian custom married to one of their own number, a half breed.
During the stay at winter quarters, in addition to writing up their
journals and records very carefully, they cultivated the acquaintance
of this woman. She, with her half breed husband and small child,
accompanied the expedition when it began its onward journey in the
spring of 1805. There was real need for them not only to act as guides
and interpreters, but to replace those who had been sent back down the
river with reports of the progress and observations of the expedition
up to this time. Part of the duties of the expedition, as heretofore
intimated, was to note the character and productivity of the land, as
well as the nature and number of Indians found and general information
concerning them and their mode of living.

When the falls of the Missouri were reached there seemed to be an
_impasse_. But from logs and other timbers found there they constructed
a crude wagon on which their supplies and equipment were transported
to the river above. They had brought with them the iron framework of a
smaller boat than those used heretofore with the idea of covering it
with stretched skins. They found difficulty, however, in getting it
watertight. They attempted to get pitch by heating pine tree trunks
but were again unsuccessful. They resorted finally to a combination of
powdered charcoal, beeswax, and buffalo tallow--practically natural
products of the land. The boat floated nicely and they were greatly
encouraged but when it was taken from the water the mixture dropped
off and the seams opened up. Lewis finally gave up the attempt and
buried the framework and built canoes according to the Indian fashion.
In passing up they came to forks in the river and were often at a loss
which to take. By conference with the Indian woman and reports of
scouts sent ahead they were usually fortunate in choosing the right
course. Being explorers of a new country they assigned names to the
rivers as they discovered them. At three forks, they called the rivers,
Gallatin, Madison, and Jefferson, names which they still retain. Three
branches of the Jefferson were Philosophy, Philanthropy, and Wisdom;
these names have not remained--probably they were too fanciful--the
Philanthropy is now the odoriferous Stinking Water.

They followed up the Jefferson until it became too shallow and
precipitous to navigate longer. Lewis started out overland into the
interior hoping to find an Indian habitation and someone who would
guide him to waters flowing Pacificward. Game, which had been very
abundant practically all the way, was here scarce and the company were
often hungry, and very likely despondent. After arduous and weary
wandering Lewis came across an old Indian woman and some girls. They
were afraid of him and bowed their heads for execution. Instead he
gave them trinkets and face paint. The men of the tribe having come up
he with difficulty persuaded them to go with him to the river where
the “Bird Woman” who had come with them from the Mandan village was
recognized as the sister of the chief of the band with which Lewis had
fortunately come in contact.

Their food up to this time, which was mostly meat, was easily supplied
from the numerous herds of buffalo, elk, deer, and antelope; from
flocks of wild fowl, and prairie chickens; and from several varieties
of fish found in the waters. “On the return voyage, when Clark was
descending the Yellowstone River, a vast herd of buffalo, swimming and
wading, plowed its way across the stream where it was a mile wide, in
a column so thick that explorers had to draw up on shore and wait for
an hour, until it passed by, before continuing their journey.”[30]
They frequently found hungry wolves, grizzly bears, and rattlesnakes
which gave them more or less trouble, but they complained mostly of the
mosquitoes.

But now having left the open country they found game very scarce.
The Indians occasionally brought them a Rocky Mountain sheep but
they themselves claim never to have seen one alive. After a short
exploration in the region of the headwaters of the Jefferson they
decided to continue toward the west. So purchasing ponies from the
Indians and cacheing most of their goods went on until the rivers
were again passable for boats, where making new canoes they again
took to the waters and voyaged to the mouth of the Columbia. Hunger
harassed them, while rapids and whirlpools made their downward travel
very disagreeable. The Indians on the lower reaches were generally
friendly but their food consisted largely of dog meat, which at first
was nauseating; however, after awhile they became reconciled to the
Indians’ favorite dish.

The party wintered on the coast at a post they named Fort Clatsch. The
damp winds here were cold and raw and to persons used to active outdoor
life the winter’s enforced idleness cloyed, and they were glad when
spring came and they could turn back. The streams toward the mountains
are very swift so much of the return journey to the place where they
had left their horses with the Nez Percé Indians had to be made on
foot. Upon again securing their horses they separated at the top of the
divide, Lewis returning by way of the Missouri and Clark going by way
of the Yellowstone. Clark for a portion of the way subdivided his party
in order that the maximum territory might be explored. They met again
at the confluence of the Missouri and Yellowstone and concluded their
expedition at St. Louis, September 23, 1806. Thus ended a marvelous
journey of three and a third years through a wilderness beset with many
dangers, inhabited by savage tribes, venomous reptiles, and ferocious
beasts; but a wilderness on the whole extremely friendly, abounding in
succulent vegetation and edible game, and endowed with a healthful and
invigorating climate. During all this time, notwithstanding hardships
and exposures, one man only had died, one had deserted and not more
than two Indians had been killed.[31] To Lewis and Clark for their
ability to handle men, for their courage, and fidelity should be given
much praise.

Upon the report of this expedition being made public very many
hunters, trappers and fur traders came to the lands beyond the
Missouri. These in turn were followed by bona-fide settlers. Soon this
country was furnishing supplies for those farther east, the great
rivers Missouri, Mississippi, and Ohio being busy routes of internal
commerce. As a result of Lewis and Clark’s labors the United States was
able to lay claim to the Oregon country some years later. The door was
opened for the development of a vast empire with versatile resources
far beyond the fabled riches of the far east.


=Transcontinental Trails.=--Following the purchase of the Louisiana
territory there was, of course, an extension of settlement to the
prairies beyond the Missouri. The State of Missouri was early occupied
and became a state in 1821, but it was many years later before other
portions of the Louisiana Purchase were sufficiently settled to become
territories.[32] The settlement of these lands, together with the
opening up of Oregon and later California with its great gold rush,
created a demand for transcontinental roads. The mountain ranges
were searched for passes, possibly not so much for the purposes of
settlement as means for going to and coming from fur trading posts
which large companies established throughout the whole Rocky Mountain
region. St. Louis became the greatest fur center in the world, a
position which she probably holds still.[33] Provost, leader of
a detachment of the Rocky Mountain Fur Company (Wm. H. Ashley, of
Virginia, founder), found the South Pass by way of the Sweetwater
branch of the North Fork of the Platte River, 1823. This pass held
preëminence as a crossing through the Rockies to the great interior
basin and to the Pacific coast. Already has been mentioned the
crossing of Lewis and Clark in the North. Bridger discovered the pass
in Southern Wyoming bearing his name, about 1824. This defile though
wide enough for an army to pass through seems narrow because of its
lateral walls of red granite and metamorphic sandstone extending almost
perpendicularly from 1000 to 25,000 feet. The overland mail route prior
to the building of the Union Pacific Railroad was through this pass.
Jedediah Smith, who succeeded Ashley as head of the Rocky Mountain
Fur Company, explored practically all the region from Great Salt Lake
to the Pacific, and from San Diego to the upper Columbia River in
Canada. To him is the world indebted for its first knowledge of much
of the vast region west of Salt Lake as by other active members of
this company was revealed the sources of the Platte, the Yellowstone,
the Green and the Snake Rivers, and possible routes through the almost
impassable mountains drained by them. New England was especially
interested in the Oregon country and through men from there the
Humboldt River route was discovered.

During this same period there were being opened up trade and trade
routes with the Spanish possessions farther south. In 1822 a wagon
train was taken from Missouri to Santa Fé by a man named Beckwith to
trade for horses and mules, and trap along the way. For years St. Louis
was headquarters for many overland traders to these regions, taking
to them cloths and other manufactured goods and bringing back furs,
silver, mules, and horses.

[Illustration: TRANSCONTINENTAL TRAILS IN THE UNITED STATES]

The Oregon Trail, the Santa Fé Trail, the Spanish Trail and the Gila
Route, had become quite well known by the early ’thirties and after the
discovery of gold in California in ’forty-nine carried many people and
much traffic across the continent.


=Origin of the Oregon Trail.=--At Bellevue the Nebraska State
Historical Society erected, June 23, 1910, a monument a part of the
inscription on which reads:

  Commemorative of the Astorian Expedition organized June 23, 1810, by
  John Jacob Astor’s American Fur Company. This Expedition discovered
  the Oregon Trail which spread knowledge of the Nebraska country
  leading to its occupancy by white people.

John Jacob Astor’s purpose in organizing the Pacific Fur Company, a
subsidiary of the American Fur Company, was to establish himself and
American control in the already disputed Oregon country.[34] As a
result two expeditions were fitted out to go to and establish trading
posts in Oregon with a central control or main post at Astoria. One
of these expeditions went by water around Cape Horn to “carry out the
people, stores, ammunition and merchandise, requisite for establishing
a fortified trading post at the mouth of the Columbia River.” The other
“conducted by Mr. Hunt, was to proceed up the Missouri, and across the
Rocky Mountains, to the same point: exploring a line of communication
across the continent, and noting the place where interior trading posts
might be established.”[35]

The overland expedition, consisting of about sixty men with four boats
left their winter quarters in Missouri and proceeded up the river in
the spring of 1811. They deviated somewhat from Lewis and Clark’s route
by leaving the Missouri River at the mouth of the Grand River, near
where the Pacific extension of the Chicago, Milwaukee, and St. Paul
railroad crosses. They seem to have gone across the country north of
the Black Hills into Wyoming to the Wind River and Wind Mountains south
of the Yellowstone Park, using present-day terms for locations; thence
a short distance to the head waters of the Snake River, a part of the
Lewis and Clark route, which with some deviations they followed to the
Columbia. At the mouth of the Columbia they met the sea party, and on
July 28, 1812, a party of six men started back with dispatches. They
wintered near Scott’s Bluff, Nebraska, having crossed the mountains
substantially along the line afterwards known as the Oregon Trail. In
the spring of 1813 they continued down the Platte to the Missouri.
This trip proved the possibility of a direct route avoiding the long
roundabout journey by way of the headwaters of the Missouri River. The
evolution of the Oregon Trail has been summarized by Albert Watkins,
Historian of the Nebraska State Historical Society, in Collections,
Vol. XVI, p. 26, as follows:[36]

  The Missouri Fur Company sent an expedition of 150 men to the upper
  waters of the Missouri in 1809. The powerful and ferocious Black Feet
  Indians, who were the providence of the Oregon Trail, discouraged
  the attempts of these men to gain permanent foothold there. Part
  of them retreated and another part, headed by the intrepid Henry,
  crossed the mountain divide in the fall of 1810 and established Fort
  Henry on Henry’s Fork of the Snake River. This was the beginning of
  the southern movement. In 1821 Pilcher, who succeeded Lisa as head
  of the Missouri Fur Company, made another attempt at a foothold in
  the Black Feet country, but was forced back. Ashley, leader of the
  Rocky Mountain Fur Company, organized in 1822, was also beaten back
  in 1823. By this time Henry was discouraged about holding on to the
  upper Missouri and turned his attention to permanent exploitation
  of the Green River valley. In that year Provost made the important
  discovery of South Pass. In 1824, Ashley conducted an expedition
  to the lower fields along the regular trail except that he went to
  Council Bluff and from there west up the Platte Valley. In 1830, his
  great lieutenants, Smith, Jackson and Sublette, went west with a
  train of fourteen wagons--the first to go to the mountains over the
  cut-off; that is, up the Little Blue valley to its head, across to
  the Platte, following the river to the mountains. In 1832 Bonneville
  also went over the cut-off and took a wagon train over the South
  Pass, the first wagons to cross the mountains. In 1832 Nathaniel
  Wyeth went over the cut-off to Oregon, but did not take wagons over
  the mountainous part of the course. In 1836 Marcus Whitman, one of
  the intrepid winners and founders of Oregon, went almost through
  to the Columbia with a wagon, thus demonstrating and illustrating
  the practicability of a transcontinental road for all purposes. The
  Oregon Trail was now clearly outlined. It was thoroughly established
  in 1842 by the aggressive Oregon emigration.


=The Final Trail.=--The Trail as finally adopted and used by emigrants
and freighters to Oregon in the “forties” started from Independence
and Westport (outfitting stations near the present metropolis of
Kansas City, Missouri) then followed in a general way the Kansas, Big
Blue, and Little Blue Rivers to near the Platte, crossing over to the
latter river a short distance west of the present city of Kearney. The
trail here proceeded up the South bank to the forks, and from there
up the North Fork to the Sweetwater which it followed through South
Pass. Thence it bore southwestward, westward, and northwestward to the
Snake River which was followed to a point about west of Boise where a
cutoff was made through the Blue Mountains arriving at the Columbia
River about the mouth of the Umatilla, thence down the Columbia to the
Pacific Ocean.


=Salt Lake Trail.=--Many variations of the above described trail were
in use. Travelers up the Missouri River disembarked at St. Joseph,
Nebraska City, Plattsmouth and especially at Council Bluffs. The great
Mormon trek was made from the last-named place. They reached the Platte
River west of Omaha and followed it on the north bank, paralleling the
Oregon Trail from Fort Kearney to Fort Laramie, where they crossed over
and joined with the Oregon Trail through South Pass then leaving that
trail turned south and west to Great Salt Lake.


=Later California Trail.=--A continuation of the Salt Lake route north
of Great Salt Lake and along the Humboldt River, across the desert to
near Lake Tahoe, where there was a crossing through the Sierra Nevada
Mountains, the Truckee Pass, thence to the Gold Diggings or across
California by way of the American and Sacramento Rivers, was a trail
very popular to California gold miners and was afterwards used by the
overland stage, and known as the Later California Trail.


=Santa Fé Trail.=--This road passed westward and a little south to the
Arkansas River, which it followed to Bent’s Fort (Colorado), thence up
Timpas Creek and over the Raton Pass to Las Vegas (New Mexico). Then
westward through Apache Cañon to Santa Fé. This trail was too rough
for wagon traffic, so later a route which crossed over south from the
Arkansas to the Cimarron and meeting the old trail at Las Vegas was
used.


=Gila and Spanish Trails.=--Two routes were possible from Santa Fé. One
southwestward by way of the Rio Grande and Gila Rivers into southern
California. The other took a northwesterly direction up the Chama
River, down the Dolores Valley, and across to the Grand River near
the present site of Moab, Utah. Then west to the Sevier, up which it
followed until it crossed over to the Virgin River; up this for a short
distance then turned directly south-west across the Mohave desert
toward Los Angeles. This last route received the name of Spanish Trail.

Many of these trails were difficult on account of scarcity of water
in the deserts. Descriptions of early travel over them are replete
with hardships, sickness, and deaths. Some of the graves were marked
with wooden, stone, or iron markers with names roughly chiseled, but
more received no marking whatsoever. Many travelers and settlers were
killed by the Indians; the tribes apparently becoming more hostile
as the number of whites increased until their own numbers became so
decimated they could no longer command sufficient warriors to warrant
further attacks. It would seem as though no advance in civilization is
unaccompanied by its toll of human lives.


=Era of Turnpiking.=--The need of better transportation facilities was
“borne in” on the people of the eastern part of the country long before
the west had been developed. The Indian trail, a single path,--for
they always traveled in single file--gave way to the “tote path” over
which each year the settler’s surplus crops were transported to market
on pack animals. Even if they owned wheeled vehicles the roads were
generally so bad they could not be used. However, wheeled vehicles
were not many prior to 1800. When Braddock wished to transport his
army to western Pennsylvania he called upon the colonies for wagons,
but Maryland and Virginia furnished only twenty-five. He appealed
to Franklin, who by his influence was able to secure 154 wheeled
vehicles[37] from Pennsylvania, probably the best supplied with wagons
of all the colonies.

It was the custom for communities to join together after crops were
gathered to start a caravan of packers to market.[38] A master driver
with one or two assistants could manage a pack-train of a dozen or so
horses. “Hides and peltries, ginseng, and bear’s grease” are mentioned
as articles to be bartered for salt, iron, nails, pewter plates and
dishes, and cloth and articles of clothing, although the latter were
usually made at home. The horses traveled in single file each fitted
with a natural crotch of wood for a tree. Hobbles and bells were
provided that the horses could be turned loose to graze at night.
Sometimes packs had to be taken off to be carried over streams or
through narrow defiles. Naturally, methods of transportation had much
influence on the character of the crops raised. Stock--cows, sheep,
and pigs--could be driven to market by the raiser or sold to a drover
who acted as a middleman. Farm products were concentrated by being fed
to stock or manufactured into something requiring less space. Settlers
complained that it required two bushels of grain to get one to market.
Whisky and brandy were easily made, served to concentrate the grain
and surplus fruit and always had a ready sale. When the government
placed an excise tax on it the opposition was so great as to produce an
insurrection in Pennsylvania (1794). Had there been good transportation
facilities probably there never would have been a “Whisky Rebellion.”
Sixteen gallons (two kegs) of whisky worth $1.00 per gallon east of
the Alleghanies was a horse load; whereas the same animal would only
pack about two bushels of grain worth, perhaps, 80 cents. That packing
was a business of considerable importance is shown by a statement in
“The History and Topography of Dauphin (and) Cumberland Counties (Pa.)”
quoted by Dunbar: “Sixty or seventy years ago five hundred pack horses
had been at one time in Carlisle, going thence to Shippenburg, Fort
London and further westward.” This was written in 1848.

Naturally so much traffic induced men to make packing a means of
livelihood. They became so numerous and strong that when wagons
began to take over the business of freighting they considered it
an infringement upon their vested rights. But as goods could be
transported more easily and cheaply by wagon the old had to make way
for the new. Wagon roads and at first two-wheeled then four-wheeled
vehicles began to appear. This created a demand for better roads. At
first that consisted in merely widening the packtrain trails. But
about the beginning of the nineteenth century, Tresaguet in France,
and Macadam and Telford, in Great Britain, were building broken-stone
roads which greatly changed and augmented the internal commerce and
the industry of those countries. The most populous and wealthy of the
colonies likewise began to consider the road question. A few military
roads, such as Braddock’s, had been constructed; there was a road along
the coast of Massachusetts, and some roads and bridges in the interior,
there were roads connecting the larger cities as from Boston to New
York and from New York to Philadelphia. The cities in order to retain
and extend their trade needed highways of commerce.


=Turnpike Roads.=--The construction of turnpike roads many of which
were stoned was encouraged by a number of the states, especially by
Pennsylvania. The Lancaster turnpike from Philadelphia to Lancaster
was “stoned” in 1792 by throwing on it stones of all sizes. These were
afterwards removed and stones “passing a 2-inch ring” substituted. This
is said to have been the first scientifically built hard surfaced
road in America. In 1800 Pennsylvania fostered the construction
of a system of turnpikes (toll roads), by granting franchises and
subscribing stock, which was eventually to cover the state and control
the western market. By 1828 there had been 3110 miles of chartered
turnpike in Pennsylvania costing over $8,000,000. These thousands
of miles of fine turnpike roads including many good bridges placed
Pennsylvania in the lead for internal improvements. But other states
were similarly employed. New York and New England by 1811 had chartered
317 turnpikes.[39] Virginia appropriated funds “to be used exclusively
for river improvements, canals and public highways,” in 1816. South
Carolina voted a million dollars, in 1818, to be raised in four annual
levies for similar purposes.

During these years the states were opening public roads but the only
good roads were those built by the turnpike companies, which erected
gates and collected tolls every few miles. This resulted in a higher
cost of transportation than was liked by the public who clamored for
free roads and canals. They were wanted by both the producer and the
merchant. The turnpikes were opposed to anything which would tend to
reduce their control of transportation.


=Wagon Road Desuetude.=--The introduction of the steam railway with
its quicker, better, and cheaper form of transportation put out of
existence the freighting and coaching business of the turnpikes, in
fact of all wagon roads. Roads which had had a thriving trade found
their toll boxes scarcely held enough to maintain the gate keeper. As
there was no adequate system of maintenance, although many of them
had been macadamized, they gradually fell into a state of disrepair.
Freighters and coachers gravitated westward or took shorter runs as
feeders to the railroads. Turnpikes, built as private or semi-private
enterprises, were gradually being taken over by the public and
maintained by local road overseers. The old practice of calling on
the freeholders to work out their road tax annually was in vogue and
is still in use in places. By it no road was ever kept at a high state
of efficiency. Even the National highway, the Cumberland Road, which
had been constructed to Vandalia, Illinois, and surfaced with stone to
Columbus, Ohio, at an expense to the nation of nearly seven millions of
dollars, had lost its ardent supporters. Jackson’s theory that national
money should only be spent for roads in territories, and the states’
right idea that each state should be the unit of government and look
after all its own internal affairs, seemed to prevail. As a result
wagon road building further than to make a mere way for crop marketing
at odd seasons of the year stood still until bicycle enthusiasts began
an agitation for better roads about 1890. However, a real awakening
to the advantages of good roads came only after the advent of the
automobile about 1900.


=National Participation.=--The Revolutionary War had shown the need
of roadways for quick intercourse between the seaboard and the
trans-Alleghany regions. The efforts of the different states, still
retaining their colonial jealousies, to secure the control of the trade
of these regions emphasized the need of a unifying influence which
would bring harmony. The debate proceeded in a desultory fashion for a
number of years. Strict constitutionalists did not believe the national
government has the authority to construct roads at all. States’ rights
men argued that road construction is the province of the states and
the National Government has jurisdiction only in the territories. On
March 29, 1806, President Thomas Jefferson approved a bill to survey
and construct a road from a point on the Potomac near Cumberland to
the Ohio River near Steubenville popularly known as the Cumberland
or National road, and appropriated therefor $30,000. This was in the
minds of friends of government control to be the beginning; there was
increasing need of travel and traffic facilities from the Hudson to
the Great Lakes, from the Delaware to the Ohio; from Virginia and the
Carolinas to Kentucky and Tennessee, to say nothing of north and south
routes, which unfortunately did not mature in time to prevent the great
Civil War a half-century later.

Alfred Gallatin and Henry Clay sponsored the Cumberland Road. The
former in compliance with the wish of Congress (1808) drew up a scheme
for a national system of internal improvements by roads and canals at
an annual expense of $2,000,000 for ten years. But its opponents were
able to stay it off and the war of 1812 coming on caused financial
troubles and the entire scheme was indefinitely postponed.

The first appropriation for the Cumberland Road had been made, not
from the general funds of the government, but from the proceeds of the
sales of land, a fiction, of course, for the benefit of the strict
constitutionalists. Gradually, however, Congress came to accept the
doctrine of “implied powers.” Madison in his last message invited the
attention of Congress “to the expediency of exercising their existing
powers and, where necessary, of resorting to the prescribed mode of
enlarging them, in order to effectuate a comprehensive system of roads
and canals, such as will have the effect of drawing more closely
together every part of the country, by promoting intercourse and
improvements and by increasing the share of every part of the common
stock of national prosperity.”[40]

Up to this time there had been completed only 23 miles of the road.
In 1816, $300,000 was appropriated for its completion; two years
later $260,000 was voted; but a proposal to appropriate $600,000 for
internal improvements failed in 1817, as did also a bill providing for
the extension of the Cumberland Road. But as a result of the labor of
Henry Clay, Albert Gallatin, Thomas Jefferson, President James Madison,
and other friends of cheap and rapid transit, by 1820 the total of
Congressional appropriations for the Cumberland Road amounted to more
than $1,500,000; in 1844 the thirty-fourth appropriation made a total
of nearly $7,000,000.[41] The growth of the road was slow: the first
contract was let in 1811 for 10 miles; contracts for short sections
were let from year to year and the road by 1817 had crawled, following
approximately the Nemacolin Path, with the Potomac through the
Cumberland gateway over the Alleghany range by way of Negro Mountain at
an elevation of 2325 feet, down to the Youghiogheny, past the scene of
Braddock’s defeat and the cairn which marks his resting place, through
the Laurel Hill Range over to Brownsville within reach of Pittsburgh,
thence westward slightly north through Washington (Pennsylvania), to
Wheeling (West Virginia) on the Ohio River.

Thus had the old Indian trail developed into a route for Washington
and his band to Fort Necessity; into Braddock’s road to Great Meadows;
into a pack train trail trampled by thousands of caravan hoofs; and,
finally, into a finished paved highway cleared to 66 feet in width,
having no grade above 5 per cent which Washington and Jefferson and
Madison had visions would be the means of binding together with the
strong bands of commerce the cis- and trans-Alleghanian countries.


=Extension of the Cumberland Highway.=--The road immediately proved
its worth. The mail coaches were placed upon it; great freight lines
were established having their own stage houses and depots in towns
along its way; inns and hotels thrived; apparently the “pulse of the
nation beat to the steady throb of trade along its highway.”[42] Like
the Appian Way it became noted the world over. The _National_, _Good
Intent_, _June Bug_, and _Pioneer_ stage coach lines were common names
as are the _Pennsylvania_, _New York Central_, _Burlington_, and _Union
Pacific_ railroad lines of to-day. The coming to town of these coaches,
which had developed from the plain square box, through the oval type
to the finished Concord painted in brilliant colors, perhaps bearing
the name of some prominent personage, drawn by four and six horses,
with the proud and arrogant driver often better known than the eminent
patrons whose names now grace the pages of history, was an important
event in the work of the day. Hardly had the stage stopped before the
hostlers were busy changing the horses, taking the tired animals to
rub-down, rest, and feed, bringing on fresh high-stepping spirited
ones, champing their bits, apparently very anxious for a galloping
start toward the next post; the passengers were alighting to stretch
their legs, rest and refresh themselves at nearby food “emporiums”
or select an inn from among the claims of numerous barkers; agents
were transferring and recording baggage, mail, and express; and the
curiosity loungers constituted most of the remaining populace. The
stage driver, Westover, made a record of forty-five minutes for the 20
miles between Uniontown and Brownsville, while “Red” Bunting’s drive of
131 miles, with the declaration of war against Mexico, in twelve hours
remains, like Paul Revere’s ride, a part of the nation’s history.

The amount of traffic over the National road was tremendous. The
annual traffic was probably not less than 3000 wagons.[43] One firm in
Wheeling is said to have, during the first five years of its existence,
done a business of over 5000 wagons carrying 2 tons each.[44] A view
of the road must have been interesting, for the Conestoga wagons with
their sway-backed canvas covers were said to have been “visible all
day long,[45] at every point, making the highway look more like a
leading avenue of a great city than a road through rural districts....
I have staid over night with William Cheets on Nigger (Negro) Mountain
when there were about thirty six-horse teams in a wagon yard, a
hundred Kentucky mules in an adjoining lot, a thousand hogs in their
enclosures, and as many fat cattle in adjoining fields. The music made
by this large number of hogs eating corn on a frosty night I shall
never forget. After supper and attention to the teams, the waggoners
would gather in the bar-room and listen to the music on the violin
furnished by one of their fellows, have a Virginia hoe-down, sing
songs, tell anecdotes, and hear the experience of drivers and drovers
from all points of the road, and, when it was over, unroll their beds,
lay them down on the floor before the bar room fire side by side, and
sleep with their feet near the blaze as soundly as under a parental
roof.”

Ah! where is the poet whose facile pen will engrave upon the tablets
of literature the tales of these men as has Longfellow the “Tales of a
Wayside Inn” in Sudbury Town so alike, where:

    ... from the parlor of the inn
    A pleasant murmur smote the ear,
    Like water rushing through a weir;
    Oft interrupted by the din
    Of laughter and of loud applause;
    And, in each intervening pause,
    The music of a violin.

The success of the Cumberland Road to the Ohio created demands for its
extension. In conformity to this demand $10,000 was appropriated in
1820 to lay out a road from Wheeling to the Mississippi River near St.
Louis. This continuation was for a road 80 feet wide and in spite of
much congressional objection and occasional presidential vetoes, the
road was pushed on; the last appropriation being made for a portion
west of the Ohio, May 25, 1838. The exact total of all appropriations
amounted to $6,824,919.33. The road proper reached southern Illinois.

[Illustration:

  _Courtesy of Prof. P. K. Slaymaker_

WAY BILL USED ON SLAYMAKER STAGE LINE FROM LANCASTER TO PHILADELPHIA,
1815]

States wanted appropriations for other roads, but these were pretty
generally vetoed. One important case was the veto, 1830, by Jackson
of the bill authorizing a subscription by the United States for stock
in the Maysville, Washington, Paris, and Lexington Road Company.
The company was incorporated in Kentucky to build a road from the
Cumberland Road at Tanesville, Ohio, to Florence, Alabama, on the
Tennessee River, which had been surveyed by U. S. engineers in 1827.
Maysville, through which the road was to pass, was on the south side of
the Ohio River, and did considerable trade in Kentucky and Tennessee. A
census was taken of the existing road, admitted to be in bad condition,
showing an average daily traffic of 351 persons, 33 carriages and 51
wagons. The $150,000 to be subscribed by the government was not to be
paid until an equal amount had been subscribed in equal parts by the
State of Kentucky and private individuals. Other bills of a similar
character were before Congress, one for a road from Buffalo to New
Orleans having been laid on the table, and opponents of the bill
insisted any road anywhere could be as well regarded to be a national
road as could be the Maysville road. The Washington Turnpike Company
bill of a similar tenor was vetoed.[46] Jackson evidently doubted the
constitutional right of the government to enter into internal projects
of this character. In his message to Congress he had conceded that
“every member of the Union, in peace and in war, will be benefited by
the improvement of inland navigation and the construction of highways
in the several states,” he noted the opposition to methods heretofore
adopted as unconstitutional and inexpedient. He therefore proposed
an amendment to the constitution, to be submitted if it could not
otherwise be done, whereby the surplus revenue might be appropriated to
the several states in proportion to their representation in Congress
for the purpose of internal improvements. State sovereignty was always
to be maintained.

In 1838 when the road had reached Southern Illinois a new element
entered the industrial world. The railroads were proving their ability
to compete most successfully with other forms of transportation. The
building of national highways ceased; canal and river transportation
were practically put out of business with the entrance of this new
leviathan.


SELECTED REFERENCES

  ADAMS, HENRY, “Life of Albert Gallatin,” Edited by Henry Adams,
  Vol. I, pp. 78, 79, 305, 309, 370, 395. J. B. Lippincott & Co.,
  Philadelphia.

  BOONE, DANIEL, “Autobiography,” dictated to John Filson, 1784, is
  given also as an appendix to Hartley’s “Life of Daniel Boone.”

  CALK, WILLIAM, “Diary of” in Filson Club publications.

  DODDRIDGE, JOSEPH, “Notes on the Settlement of Indian Wars.” Chaps.
  I, XIII, XVIII, XXIV; First publication, 1824, Third--Rittenour &
  Linsey, Pittsburgh, 1912.

  DUNBAR, SEYMOUR, “A History of Travel in America,” 4 volumes, 1915,
  Bobbs-Merrill Co., Indianapolis.

  EARLY, ALICE MORSE, “Stage Coach and Tavern Days.”

  CHANNING, EDWARD, “The Jefferson System,” Vol. XII, The American
  Nation Series, Harper & Brothers, New York.

  FARRAND, L., “Bases of American History,” Vol. II of the American
  Nation Series, Harper & Brothers, New York.

  HARTLEY, CECIL B., “Life of Daniel Boone,” 1865, Porter & Coates,
  Philadelphia.

  HOWARD, GEORGE E., “Preliminaries of the Revolution,” Vol. VIII of
  the American Nation Series, Harper & Brothers, New York.

  HOWE, HENRY, “History of the West.”

  HURLBERT, A. B., “Historic Highways of America,” 16 volumes, 1902-05,
  A. H. Clark Company, Cleveland, O.

  HURLBERT, A. B., “The Paths of Inland Commerce,” Chronicles of
  America Series, Vol. 21, New Haven, 1920.

  IRVING, WASHINGTON, “Astoria,” Irving’s Works, Vol. I, G. P. Putnam’s
  Sons, New York.

  LONGFELLOW, HENRY W., “Poetical Works,” Houghton Mifflin Co., Boston.

  MCMASTER, JOHN BACH, “History of the United States,” Vol. V, Chap.
  XLIV, D. Appleton & Company, New York.

  MONETTE, JOHN W., “History of the Valley of the Mississippi,” Vol.
  II, Chap. II, pp. 52-58, Harper & Brothers, New York, 1846.

  “Register of Debates in Congress,” Vol. VI, pp. 433-435, 806, and
  820. Published by order of Congress, 13 Vol. Washington, 1825-37.

  RICHARDSON, JAMES D., “Messages and Papers of the Presidents.” 8
  volumes, Government Print, Washington.

  ROOSEVELT, THEODORE, “Winning of the West,” Vols. I, II and IV. G. P.
  Putnam’s Sons, New York, 1889.

  SPEED, THOMAS, “The Wilderness Road,” No. 2 of the Filson Club
  publications, Louisville, 1886.

  TURNER, FREDERICK J., “Rise of the New West,” Vol. XIV of the
  American Nation Series, Harper & Brothers, New York.

  TYLER, L. G., “England in America,” Vol. IV of the American Nation
  Series, Harper & Brothers, New York.

  U. S. Census review of “Agencies of Transportation,” 1880.

  WATKINS, ALBERT, “The Oregon Trail,” Nebraska State Historical
  Society Collections, Vol. XVI, p. 26 et seq.


FOOTNOTES

  [16] “A History of Travel,” by Seymour Dunbar.

  [17] “The American Nation,” “England in America,” by L. G. Tyler.
  Vol. IV, p. 322.

  [18] “American Nation,” Vol. VIII, p. 15.

  [19] Cf. “Historic Highways of America,” by A. B. Hurlbert, and
  “Basis of American History” (Vol. II of “The American Nation”), by L.
  Farrand.

  [20] Ramsey’s “Annals of Tennessee.”

  [21] “Historic Highways of America,” by A. B. Hurlbert, 16 volumes,
  1902-05, A. H. Clark Company, Cleveland. A series of annotated
  reprints of some of the best contemporary volumes of travel in
  America, compiled by Reuben Gold Thwaites, 1904-07, 32 volumes, A. H.
  Clark Co., Cleveland.

  “A History of Travel in America,” by Seymour Dunbar, 4 volumes, 1915,
  Bobbs-Merrill Company, Indianapolis, Ind.

  “Basis of American History,” Chapter II, “Routes of Travel,” Vol. II
  of the American Nation Series, by Livingston Farrand, 1907, Harper &
  Brothers, New York. There is good bibliography in this volume.

  [22] Cecil B. Hartley in his “Life of Daniel Boone,” gives the name
  of the head of this company as Colonel Richard Henderson.

  [23] “The Winning of the West,” Vol. II, by Theodore Roosevelt.

  [24] Dunbar’s “History of Travel,” Vol. I. Roosevelt’s “Winning of
  the West,” Vol. II.

  [25] “The Wilderness Road.”

  [26] “A History of Travel in America.”

  [27] “Winning of the West.”

  [28] Henry Howe.

  [29] A pirogue proper is a canoe dug out of a single log. These may
  have been and probably were keel boats built of timber and the name
  pirogue extended to them colloquially.

  [30] “The Winning of the West,” Vol. VI, by Theodore Roosevelt.

  [31] Cf. “Winning of the West,” Vol. VI, p. 259; and “The American
  Nation,” Vol. XII, p. 94.

  [32]

  ------------+-------+----------+----------
              |       |Admitted a|Admitted a
    State     |Settled|Territory |  State
  ------------+-------+----------+----------
  Missouri    |  1755 |   1812   |  1821
  Arkansas    |  1685 |   1819   |  1836
  Kansas      |  1854 |   1854   |  1861
  Nebraska    |  1847 |   1854   |  1867
  North Dakota|  1812 |   1861   |  1889
  South Dakota|  1859 |   1861   |  1889
  Wyoming     |  1834 |   1868   |  1890
  Colorado    |  1859 |   1861   |  1876
  Idaho       |  1852 |   1863   |  1890
  Montana     |  1861 |   1864   |  1889
  Iowa        |  1833 |   1838   |  1846
  Minnesota   |  1846 |   1849   |  1858
  ------------+-------+----------+----------


  [33] Reports for 1920 show that New York has exceeded St. Louis in
  manufactured furs but St. Louis seems still to be the largest market
  for raw furs.

  [34] Albert Watkins in “Collections of the Nebraska State Historical
  Society.” Vol. XVI, p. 22.

  [35] Washington Irving’s “Astoria.”

  [36] Cf. p. 230, Ibid.

  [37] Dunbar’s “History of Travel.”

  [38] Doddridge’s “Notes on the Settlement of Indian Wars.” Monette’s
  “History of the Valley of the Mississippi.”

  [39] Cf. Gallatin’s report for a scheme of national roads and
  pavements (Adams’ Gallatin, p. 350 et seq.).

  [40] Richardson, “Messages and Papers.”

  [41] Hurlbert, “Cumberland Road.”

  [42] Hulbert, “The Paths of Inland Commerce.”

  [43] “American Nation,” Vol. XIV, p. 100.

  [44] Hurlbert, “The Paths of Inland Commerce,” p. 121.

  [45] Searight, quoted by Hurlbert.

  [46] Debates of Congress VI, 433-435, 806, 820.




CHAPTER III

WATER WAYS AND CANALS


From the earliest exploration and settlement periods rivers and coast
inlets have been used for transportation. As has been pointed out, the
Indian, before the coming of the white man, made good use of his canoe.
Boats and barges propelled by oars, poles, or snubbed along by ropes
attached to trees on the banks were in early use. Along the coast and
the larger rivers sails were made use of. Upon the ocean there was
a large development in wooden sailing vessels. The great number of
American ships and the inroads made by American merchants upon English
trade had much to do with bringing on the war of 1812.


=Canals.=--Canals had shown their usefulness in England and other
European countries, for transporting the internal commerce cheaply
and efficiently; it was but natural, therefore, that they should be
considered in the United States. The first canal was in Orange County,
New York, and was used for transporting stone as early as 1750.
Numerous short canals were constructed in Pennsylvania, New York, and
Massachusetts prior to 1810, but the peak of canal building came after
this date. The first lock used in the United States was part of a canal
extending from the Schuylkill River to the Susquehanna in Pennsylvania.

New York, seeing the trade of the Northwest Territory going to
Philadelphia on account of the turnpikes which had crossed the
Alleghanies through state and private means, was anxious to do
something to get control. An agitation for a canal joining the Hudson
River with Lake Erie or Lake Ontario consummated in a commission,
1810, headed by Gouverneur Morris, to investigate the question of
building one or both of the canals which seemed feasible, namely (1)
from Albany up the Mohawk and westward to Lake Erie near Buffalo; (2)
from Albany to Lake Champlain, thence an opening to the St. Lawrence,
which had already been surveyed. In 1812 a second commission was formed
which included with Morris, such men as De Witt Clinton, Robert Fulton,
and Robert R. Livingston. An endeavor was made to secure Congressional
aid. The war coming on no action was taken, but the demands for
the canal continued. To the energy and political ability of DeWitt
Clinton is attributed the final success of the enterprise. When he
was elected governor in 1816 he made this the paramount effort of his
administration. He stirred public interest by addresses and presented
a convincing memorial to the legislature. He argued that “As a bond
of union between the Atlantic and western states it may prevent the
dismemberment of the American empire. As an organ of communication
between the Hudson, the Mississippi, the St. Lawrence, the Great
Lakes of the north and west, and their tributary rivers, it will
create the greatest inland trade ever witnessed. The most fertile and
extensive regions of America will avail themselves of its facilities
for a market. All their surplus productions,” he prophesied, “whether
of the soil, the forest, the mines, or the water, their fabrics of
art and their supplies of foreign commodities, will concentrate in
the city of New York, for transportation abroad or consumption at
home. Agriculture, manufactures, commerce, trade, navigation and the
arts,” he continued, “will receive a corresponding encouragement. That
city will in the course of time become the granary of the world, the
emporium of commerce, the seat of manufactures, the focus of great
moneyed operations, and the concentrating point of vast, disposable
and accumulating capitals, which will stimulate, enliven, extend,
and reward the exertions of human labor and ingenuity, in all their
processes and exhibitions. And before the revolution of a century, the
whole island of Manhattan, covered with habitations and replenished
with a dense population will constitute one vast city.”[47]

As bombastic as this may seem his predictions have been more than
realized and the realization began with the completion of the canal
to Buffalo in 1825. There grew up along its way the great cities of
Buffalo, Rochester, Albany, and scores of smaller ones. The products
of the entire west did seem to flow through it, for the tolls are said
to have been a half million dollars per year immediately upon its
completion and over a million by 1830.[48]

This the largest canal project in the United States is still in use. As
first constructed, it was 40 feet wide at the top, 4 feet deep, and was
navigable for 76-ton boats. It was later enlarged to a general width of
70 feet and depth of 7 feet, navigable for boats of 240 tons burden.
Some of the locks had been replaced by power lifts; the transfers are
more quickly made.

The increase of New York’s prestige of course diminished that of
Philadelphia. Pittsburgh was, too, growing up at the head of Ohio River
navigation and in the coal and iron regions of Pennsylvania.

While numerous canals had been constructed by private enterprises
an extensive system of canals was begun under an act of 1825, to
connect Philadelphia with Pittsburgh as well as other objective
points. Jealousies sprang up over the state, as usually do with any
improvement. Always one part thinks the other is getting more than its
just share. But notwithstanding, nearly a thousand miles of canals have
been constructed in Pennsylvania, some of which washed out and were
never replaced, some were abandoned and some are still in operation.
In Ohio two canals were built by the state from Lake Erie to the
Ohio River, over 400 miles in all. One of these extended from Toledo
through Defiance, St. Mary’s, and Dayton to Cincinnati; the other from
Cleveland through Akron, New Philadelphia, Coshocton, Newark, Columbus,
Chillicothe, to Portsmouth. Branch lines were run down the Muskingum
to Marietta, down the Hocking to Athens, and from Junction westward to
Antwerp to connect with the Indiana canal system. Making a total for
Ohio about 1000[49] miles. In Indiana the Wabash & Erie Canal, begun
about 1834, was constructed through Fort Wayne, LaFayette, Terre Haute
to Evansville, in 1853, on its way to the Ohio River. By this time
the railroads had paralleled its course and its trade had practically
ceased.

One of the earliest projects, said to have had the backing of
President Washington, culminated, eventually, in the Chesapeake &
Ohio canal extending from Georgetown, the upper limit of tidewater
on the Potomac, to Cumberland. After numerous efforts and years of
talking, representatives of Maryland, Virginia, District of Columbia,
and Pennsylvania met in a convention in the city of Washington and
passed resolutions stating that “Whereas the connection of Atlantic and
Western waters by a canal leading from the city of National Government
to the River Ohio ... is one of the highest importance to the states
... Resolved that it is expedient to substitute for the present
defective navigation of the Potomac River, above tidewater, a navigable
canal from Cumberland to the eastern base of the Alleghany and to
extend such canal as soon thereafter as practicable to the highest
constant steamboat navigation of the Monongahela or Ohio River.”
Jealousies between the states delayed matters somewhat, but in 1825 the
proponents obtained governmental participation. Delays occurred for
various causes, but in 1828 Congress authorized the U. S. treasurer
to subscribe for $1,300,000 worth of stock and went further and
guaranteed subscriptions made by the towns of Washington, Georgetown,
and Alexandria to the amount of $1,500,000. The United States had then
once more endorsed the policy of spending national money for internal
improvements, and had become a partner in a canal proposition. Building
proceeded slowly. Many difficulties were encountered. Opponents fought
it in the legislatures of Maryland, Pennsylvania, and Virginia, as
well as in Congress. In two years the money was gone and the canal not
completed. Maryland extended further aid, and then still more aid by
the help of which the canal was completed to Cumberland in 1850. In
1870 efforts were made to have the Government carry the canal on to the
Ohio River, but the plan was never consummated. This canal is still in
use, the bulk of its traffic being coal brought down to Washington.

Canals were constructed in many other states, but they need not here
be followed in detail. Illinois was connecting Chicago with the
Mississippi River; Massachusetts built artificial ways about falls and
rapids; New Jersey connected the Hudson with the Delaware; and numerous
other schemes were carried out.


=Canal Prosperity and Desuetude.=--Until the greater advantages of
railway travel and traffic lessened the usefulness of the canals,
they did a thriving business. As has already been noted with regard
to the Erie canal so was it with the others.[50] In the whole United
States there was a “grand total of 4,468 miles[51] of canals, costing
approximately $214,141,802.” Not all these were remunerative. To the
end of 1872 the New York Canals had only averaged a profit of 3.2 per
cent, while the Erie Canal proper paid but 4 per cent on its cost.[52]
The speed at which the barges traveled was about 2 miles per hour; this
was reduced on account of time lost by regular stops, passing through
locks, and accidents, to 1.7 miles per hour on the average. Rates for
freight were about 0.3 cent per ton per mile. The railroads later
hauled through freight at 0.7 cent per ton per mile. Both these rates
were, no doubt too small, for proper maintenance and remuneration.

Passenger traffic, notwithstanding the slow speed, amounted to a
considerable volume. Packets were in use, that for workmanship, finish
and convenience vied with the Pullman cars which later supplanted them.
They were decorated in bright colors--green, yellow, brown, red, white,
blue--with windows and panels done in contrasting and harmonizing
shades and tints. On the interior in addition to compartments for the
crew which were separated from those for the passengers, were usually
a large general assembly room ordinarily occupied by the men for
lounging, writing letters, playing games, and protection from stormy
weather. There was a special cabin for the women, also lavatories
and conveniences for men and women. In addition there were kitchen,
lockers, and cupboards. Three times daily the assembly saloon was
transformed into a dining room by re-arranging and setting the tables
which constituted a regular part of the room’s furniture with others
of a temporary nature, carried stored away on the boat, into one long
table lengthwise of the room. The captain and his two assistants--the
mule driver and steersman not on duty at the time--performed this
service and waited upon tables. At night both the saloon and ladies’
cabin were converted into dormitories by attaching shelves about 6 feet
long and 3¹⁄₂ feet wide to hooks in the wall, the outer edges being
held up by wooden supports extending from the floor. In each berth
was placed a “mattress,” that is a tick having some straw in it and a
pillow of similar make.

The passenger usually furnished his own sheets if they were wanted,
although some of the later boats were supplied with sheets and
coverlets. The berths were three high along the wall and had curtains
suspended in front of them. The passengers selected their berths in
the order in which they had secured passage, late comers being obliged
to sleep on the tables or on the floor. Sometimes the whole floor was
thus covered. Travelers complained bitterly of the mosquitoes. Crude
as this may seem at the present time, these packets were no doubt
the forerunners of the present Pullman palace car. The outside decks
and the roof of the car were utilized for promenading, lounging and
sight-seeing. They were often enlivened by music and dancing.

Greeley[53] speaks of the “‘cent and a half a mile, mile and a half
an hour,’ line boats.” The expression he puts in quotations as though
it were common or a slogan. Charges on the Wabash and Erie Canal in
Indiana were for the 221 miles from Cincinnati to Fort Wayne, $6.75;
138 miles from LaFayette to Fort Wayne, $3.75; 104 miles from Fort
Wayne to Toledo, $3.25.[54] An average of about three cents per mile.

The canals were unable to compete with the railroads when time became
an element. Passengers would not be content to travel 36 miles per
day along a tortuous canal when they could travel a much more direct
route at nearly 36 miles per hour. The swifter speed of freight traffic
accelerated business; the merchant’s capital could be turned over more
frequently; his net profits were consequently greater. Is there any
wonder, therefore, that the business of the canal continually decreased
while that of the railroad as continually increased. Many canals were
actually abandoned, others allowed to depreciate from want of proper
maintenance, and now only occasional barges are run to transport heavy
non-perishable freight such as grain, iron-ore, and coal. And of
these commodities, because of better terminal facilities and the time
element, the railroads soon were carrying much more than the canals.

[Illustration:

  © _Underwood and Underwood_

THE SAULT ST. MARIE CANAL]


=Ship Canals.=--Reports show the tonnage of the Erie Canal to have
continually decreased from 2,031,735 tons in 1911 to 667,374 tons
in 1918. The total tonnage of all the New York state canals shows a
like decrease from 3,097,068 tons in 1911 to 1,159,270 tons in 1918.
Notwithstanding such records there are those who firmly believe canal
transportation will again take an upward trend with better terminal
facilities and possibly electric propulsion. There is one class of
canals that seems to have held its own, that is ship canals. The great
canal and locks at Sault Ste. Marie transfer a vast lake traffic
annually from one level to another between Lakes Superior and Huron.
Vast quantities of iron-ore are brought in mammoth vessels by this
route from docks near the Mesaba mines for the great iron mills at
Gary, at Cleveland, at Pittsburgh, and other points. Similar vessels
loaded with wheat, oats, and flax from the Northwest grain fields are
unloaded at Buffalo for transportation to the seaboard. Agitation
has been going on for some time to enlarge the Welland Canal and its
locks between Lakes Erie and Ontario, thus giving seagoing vessels
the opportunity of coming up by way of the St. Lawrence River and
traversing the entire Great Lake system. The ambition of cities is here
again manifest; Chicago would like such transportation, but it would
not be beneficial to New York.

A ship canal across Cape Cod saves 70 miles and considerable time
and makes the trip much less dangerous from New York to Boston. Ship
canals within the islands along the Atlantic and Gulf coasts have been
proposed to make safe coast commerce. There is also talk of a ship
canal from Chicago to the Gulf of Mexico by way of the Illinois and
Mississippi Rivers; and still another from Lake Erie to Pittsburgh.


=The Panama Canal.=--All present-day readers are familiar with the
greatest of all ship canals, the Panama Canal, constructed by the
Government at a cost of approximately $400,000,000, and open to the
ships of the world. It will be remembered that a canal across the
isthmus had been dreamed of practically ever since Balboa passed over
and for the first time a white man saw the Pacific from the west
coast of America. With the opening of the Oregon territory there was
increased interest in such a canal. With the discovery of gold in
California much traffic went by way of Panama being freighted across
and transshipped on the other side. Soon a railroad was established for
that purpose. Other crossings, too, were much in mind. In 1846 a treaty
of amity and commerce was entered into with New Granada, afterwards the
United States of Colombia, which gave the United States a right of way
across the Isthmus by any available method. In return the United States
agreed to guarantee the neutrality of the Isthmus. Great Britain had
likewise long been interested in a canal scheme and courted Nicaragua.
Also because of English settlements at Belize or British Honduras they
claimed rights which had been confirmed by the treaty of Versailles
in 1773. Another route, across the isthmus of Tehauntepec, had also
assumed importance. In 1848 a company of American citizens was formed
for and began at once to construct a railway across the isthmus of
Panama. Another contracted with the Nicaraguan government for a canal
there. A treaty was made with Nicaragua whereby a concession was
granted the company for the waterway, the United States guaranteeing
the neutrality of the way as had been done with New Grenada. But the
British government claimed control of the eastern terminus, therefore
a treaty had to be negotiated with her. As a result the Clayton-Bulwer
Treaty was signed and ratified in 1850, whereby the United States and
Great Britain agreed to join in promoting a canal by the Nicaraguan
route promising that neither “would obtain or maintain for itself any
exclusive control over the ship-canal,” nor, and here was the joker,
“assume or exercise any dominion ... over any part of Central America.”
Neither was to acquire nor have any rights the other did not have and
they both guarantee the neutrality of the canal. This, apparently,
was a violation of the Monroe Doctrine in so far as it did allow a
European nation a foothold upon this continent, and it was contrary to
the Washingtonian policy of avoiding “entangling alliances.” However,
it was considered at the time to be a victory for American diplomacy.
But Great Britain retained her hold on Belize and some islands along
the coast, and finally it was made known that before the signing of
the treaty Sir Henry Bulwer had left with Clayton a memorandum to the
effect that British renunciation in Central America should not apply
to “Belize” or any of its “dependencies.” Greytown, a British trading
post, had been established as a “free” city at the eastern terminus of
the Nicaraguan route through British influence and support.

In 1851 Greytown levied tribute upon the steamers of the transit
company. One of these refused to pay and was fired upon by a British
man-of-war, the fiction of Greytown being a “free city” apparently
went glimmering. The situation was critical and for some time looked
as though a war might result. Meanwhile the Accessory Transit Company
continued in a state of trouble with the Greytown government. So
bad was it that the United States vessel _Cyane_ was called upon to
protect the buildings of the Canal Company from destruction. Conditions
remained strained, feelings ran high, until in 1854 one of the officers
of a company steamer killed an individual and in a riot which followed
the mob attacked the United States consul. Lieutenant Hollins,
commanding officer of the Cyane, demanded reparation, and as this was
not forthcoming he bombarded and destroyed the town. This accentuated
the trouble between the United States and Great Britain but did not
particularly enhance the building of the Nicaraguan canal.

About this time Great Britain became involved in the Crimean War
while in the United States the slavery question divided the country.
Some hot-headed southerners wished forcibly to annex Nicaragua and
filibusters actually joined in some of the “revolutions” which are
almost always in progress in Central American States with the idea of
extending slave territory.[55] Through one of these a man by the name
of Walker had made himself head of Nicaragua and for two years remained
a dictator. His rule was marked by severity and a series of acts that
won him the enmity of the Central American States and also that of the
Accessory Transit Company, whose charter and steamers he confiscated.
He had secured the presidency and opened the state to slavery; he had
also been able to get recognition at Washington. But another revolution
broke out and he was driven out in 1857.

The action of Walker had destroyed American influence in Central
America. In the United States opinion was divided. Slavery enthusiasts
openly advocated control of any transit route across the isthmus and
that “no power on earth should be suffered to impede.”[56] This and
numerous other troubles which followed, off and on intermittently,
delayed and prevented canal construction.


=French Participation.=--After the opening of the Suez Canal in 1869
by the French an organization of French scientists made a careful
study of the various routes across the Isthmus and decided the one
at Panama to be the most feasible. As a result, in 1875, De Lesseps,
the engineer of the Suez Canal, began a careful survey of that route
and in 1878, Lucien Bonaparte Wyse, of the French Navy, secured from
the United States of Colombia (which had succeeded New Granada) a
concession giving a company to be organized by him exclusive right to
construct a canal and railroad across the Isthmus of Panama. Neutrality
was to be maintained and troops transported only by permission of
Colombia. In return for this privilege and certain grants of land
Colombia was to receive 5 per cent of the gross tolls collected. The
concession was for ninety-nine years and the canal was to be opened
within eighteen years. While it was claimed this concession did not
conflict with the treaty of 1846 between New Granada and the United
States, nevertheless it provided that the latter might share in its
advantages. The concession was transferred to De Lesseps, who arranged
for an International Congress of Geographical Sciences, which assembled
in Paris, May 15, 1879. The United States was one of the twenty-five
nations there represented. Fourteen projects involving seven different
routes were discussed and included all that were considered feasible.

Without going into detailed description some of these routes may be
mentioned. The Tehauntepec route was 148 miles long and required 120
locks, would take about twelve days to pass a vessel through, and was
in the region of earthquakes. The Nicaraguan Route was favored by
many--it was 180 miles long, needed 17 locks, but it required an actual
construction of only 60 miles as existing rivers and lakes could be
utilized. A route from the Chiriqui Gulf to the Gulf Dulce, another
from the Gulf of Darien by way of the Atrato and Napipi Rivers, and
another into the San Miguel Bay, were discarded for various reasons.
The choice centered upon the route from Colon to Panama by way of the
Culebra pass and the Chagres River. This route, the shortest of all,
was only 45 miles in length, but there were several disadvantages. The
Chagres River must be diverted by a large dam or carried for miles in
an aqueduct.

A company (Compagnie Universelle du Canal Interoceanique) was organized
and popular subscriptions invited. It was claimed that further than
granting the charter the French Government had nothing to do with the
canal. Stock could be owned by people of all nations, but the United
States did not take kindly to the measure, although no formal action
to prevent the construction of the canal was taken. Several promotion
schemes were advanced by private individuals to head off the French
and Congress was petitioned for aid. Captain Eads, who by jetties
had deepened the mouth of the Mississippi River, and an engineer of
note, suggested a ship railway across the isthmus of Tehauntepec. A
“Marine Canal Company of Nicaragua” wanted Congress to guarantee its
capital stock; another Nicaraguan company had Ex-President Grant as a
sponsor.[57] The surveys made by the United States of the Panama and of
the Atrato-Napipi routes in 1875, were printed by order of Congress. In
1880 the House asked the president for the report of surveys made in
1872 and submitted in 1875 which had not yet become public; this report
recommended the Nicaraguan route.

From time to time indignation was manifested in the United States
against allowing a foreign country to gain a foothold even though by
a neutral company on the American continent. The Monroe Doctrine was
brought out; the Clayton-Bulwer treaty was presented; the reports of
Congressional Commissions were referred to as arguments against the
De Lesseps Canal. Various other complications entered, one of which
was a possible conflict of authority if in case of a revolution on
the Isthmus it were necessary to send troops by the United States
to maintain the neutrality of the railroad and by France troops to
maintain the neutrality of the canal.

Sweeping aside these questions De Lesseps made preparation to construct
the canal, and landed a force of seventy engineers, superintendents
and workmen on the Isthmus of Panama in 1881. De Lesseps planned
a tide-water canal which would require a cut of 285 feet in the
Culebra pass. Difficulties encountered from slides in this cut and
other reasons made it advisable afterwards to change the plans. De
Lesseps purchased much machinery in Europe and America at large
expense; bought the Panama railroad for $17,000,000, because the
line of the Canal crossed it frequently and it could be utilized for
transporting materials, and began the operation of opening up the cut
at various points along its course. The engineers estimated the cost at
843,000,000 francs; this, De Lesseps cut to 600,000,000 francs, and
set the opening ceremonies for 1888.

During the Garfield administration Secretary of State Blaine held out
for a strong American policy and informed Colombia, which was charged
with making arrangements whereby certain European powers might assume
joint guarantee over the canal, that “any movement in the sense of
supplementing the guarantee contained (in the treaty of 1846) would
necessarily be regarded by this government as an uncalled for intrusion
into a field where the local and general interest of the United States
of America should be considered before those of any other power save
those of Colombia alone.”[58] England claimed to be a new world power
equally interested with the United States in maintaining the neutrality
of the canal. Blaine proposed amending the Clayton-Bulwer treaty so
that the United States could fortify the canal, also to annul that
part extending it to any other practical routes so that the United
States might be free to build a canal at Panama or elsewhere as it
chose. Garfield’s death and Blaine’s retirement from the cabinet ended
for the time being policies regarding South and Central Americas that
would either have brought the United States in trouble with England
or secured to her complete control of the canal and also, perhaps,
much of South American trade. A treaty with Nicaragua allowing the
construction of a canal wholly under American control, the United
States guaranteeing the integrity of the territory of Nicaragua, which
was undoubtedly a violation of the Clayton-Bulwer treaty, and prepared
by Frelinghuysen, Secretary of State under Arthur, for the purpose
of testing that treaty, was withdrawn by President Cleveland who was
inaugurated before its confirmation.

There was a growing feeling that the De Lesseps company would never
finish the canal. The company had spent $10,000,000 more than the
estimate of 600,000,000 francs ($120,000,000), and had not paid the
$17,000,000 promised for the Panama railway. In fact it was bankrupt.
While a large amount of excavation had been done, it was small compared
with what was necessary. A magnificent plant with much costly machinery
was going to decay.

The Spanish-American war brought forcibly to the attention of the
public the need of an interoceanic canal.

In 1900 a treaty negotiated by John Hay and Sir Julian Pauncefote
embodying some modifications of the Clayton-Bulwer treaty had been so
amended in the Senate that Great Britain would not accept it. A new
treaty made in view of the Senate amendments and the British objections
was submitted a few months after Roosevelt became President. It
abrogated parts of the Clayton-Bulwer Treaty and gave to the United
States full ownership and control of the proposed canal. Colonel
Roosevelt had strongly advocated this while governor of New York before
his accession to the presidency.[59]

Two commissions in the past had reported favorably on the Nicaraguan
route. A third commission with Admiral John G. Walker as chairman
was appointed and authorized in 1899 to expend a million dollars, if
necessary, to make a thorough investigation of the several routes. In
1901 the committee reported that the “Commission is of the opinion
that the most practicable and feasible route for an Isthmian Canal, to
be under the control, management, and ownership of the United States
is that known as the Nicaraguan route.”[60] The Commission placed the
estimated cost of the Nicaraguan Canal at $189,864,062; of completing
the Panama Canal at $144,233,358; and that to this latter sum should
be added the cost of acquiring the rights of the French company. The
company asked $109,141,500, but the Commission estimated its worth at
$40,000,000. The company considered this unfair but finally offered
to negotiate with the United States and sell on the best terms
possible. The Commission made a supplementary report recommending the
Panama route and purchase of the French company’s work and rights
at $40,000,000. An act was signed by the president, June 28, 1902,
which had passed Congress, not without opposition, authorizing the
president to acquire control of the rights and property of the Panama
Canal Company, to acquire perpetual control of a strip of land not
less than 6 miles in width, across the Isthmus, to proceed as soon as
these rights were acquired to construct a canal through “The Isthmian
Canal Commission” created by the act; but should he be unable to get
satisfactory title to the property of the French company and the
control of territory from Colombia, then the president was authorized
to negotiate with Nicaragua and build a canal along the Nicaraguan
route.

Attorney General Knox reported that the French company could give
a clear title; a convention was entered into by which the United
States upon the payment of $10,000,000 in cash and an annual rental
of $250,000 per year was to receive the necessary control and strip
of land. The Senate ratified this March 17, 1903. When it went to
the Colombian congress, however, it was rejected by unanimous vote.
President Roosevelt declared Colombia wanted to wait until they could
forfeit the title of the French company then sell to the United States
for $40,000,000.[61] This view may and possibly was erroneous. There
was again a demand that the Nicaraguan route be chosen. But on November
3, 1903, the Panamanians, instigated by the French company, whose
entire concession and undertaking would revert to Colombia in less than
a year,[62] seeing their interests being sacrificed by the cupidity of
Colombia, consummated a revolution. Many were of the opinion that the
president of the United States was _particeps criminis_. In a letter
to a friend[63] dated October 10, 1903, he says, “I cast aside the
proposition at this time to foment the secession of Panama. Whatever
other governments can do, the United States can not go into the
securing, by such underhand means, the cession. Privately, I freely say
to you that I should be delighted if Panama were an independent state,
or if it made itself so at this moment; but for me to say so publicly
would amount to an instigation of a revolt, and therefore I cannot say
it.”

Many years later when chaffingly accused of being a wicked conspirator,
Mr. Roosevelt is quoted as having said: “What was the use? The other
fellows in Paris and New York had taken all the risk and were doing all
the work. Instead of trying to run a parallel conspiracy, I had only to
sit still and profit by their plot--if it succeeded.”[64]

The revolution was bloodless except for the accidental killing of a
Chinaman and a dog. Colombia, however, as soon as possible sent troops
to Colon. The following day the U. S. Ship _Nashville_ landed fifty
marines. The next day the Colombian troops left, said by some to have
been bribed. A Panamanian government was formed; on November 6th, the
American consul was ordered from Washington to recognize it; a week
later their minister was formally received by President Roosevelt. On
January 4, 1904, the president presented for ratification a treaty. The
Senate ratified it February 23, 1904. Thus rapidly did things move. By
this agreement the United States secured from the Republic of Panama
a zone of land 10 miles wide for the canal with full power over it.
In return the United States guaranteed the independence of the Panama
republic, and agreed to pay $10,000,000 upon exchange of ratifications
and the sum, beginning nine years thereafter, of $250,000 per annum.

The Colombians protested and sent their former president General Reyes
to Washington to persuade the Government to abrogate its compact with
Panama. The counsel for Colombia is quoted as saying that “Reyes was
authorized to accept $8,000,000 for all the desired concessions and
he would have taken $5,000,000, but Hay and Roosevelt were so foolish
they wouldn’t accept.”[65] Be that as it may, the effort was several
times made to get for Colombia a gratuity much greater than Reyes would
have accepted, and in 1921 Congress appropriated for that purpose
$25,000,000, thus, in a way, acknowledging that Colombia was wronged
and that the United States had been profited thereby.

A commission was formed to undertake the construction of the canal.
This was changed two or three times during the construction. The
immensity of the work necessary to make a tidewater canal, and the fact
that its completion would be materially delayed, caused the abandonment
of that plan. Three sets of locks were provided--at Gatun, Pedro
Miguel, and Miraflores. A great dam was built across the lower end of
the Chagres, entirely blocking the flow of that river and creating a
large artificial lake 165 square miles in area whose maximum height is
85 feet above sea water. This lake serves for storage water necessary
to manipulate the canal and locks; any surplus flows through a spillway
into the Pacific Ocean. Great breakwaters were constructed to make
smooth harbors at Colon and Panama and prevent silting. The canal is at
sea level to Gatun, 8 miles, then three steps lead it to Gatun Lake;
it continues on that level for 32 miles; then down one step at Pedro
Miguel to Miraflores Lake, 55 feet above sea level; thence through
the Miraflores locks to sea level again and then out to deep water in
the Pacific, 11 miles. The locks are 1000 feet long and large enough
in every way to accommodate the largest ships afloat. These great
locks with their mammoth gates, tunnels for filling, and mechanical
means of operation are one of the seven wonders of the modern world.
The cost was about $400,000,000 to date of opening. Since that time
considerable sums have been spent in fortifications, improvements,
and maintenance--several large slides having occurred in the Culebra
Cut. The “total amount expended or advanced to disbursing officers
for purchase, construction, fortification, etc., to June 30, 1919,
$452,075,376.”[66] The tolls amount to about $7,000,000 annually.

The principal arguments in favor of the United States building the
inter-oceanic canal were its utility as a measure of preparedness for
and strategy in case of war. By furnishing quick passage between the
east and west coasts the navy necessary for the protection of these
coasts could be reduced one half. With the canal entirely in the
control of the Government no foreign nation could take advantage of
it to our detriment. Notwithstanding the need of the canal for war
purposes, the benefits to be derived by the commerce of peace will
doubtless be manifold more valuable. It furnishes cheap transportation
between the west and east coasts, and shortens materially the distance
from the Atlantic seaboard to western South America as well as to
the islands of the Pacific Ocean. During the year 1920, “2814 ships
representing 11,236,119 tons of cargo, passed through the waterway”
being a considerable increase over any preceding year.[67] Of these
45.5 per cent were registered United States vessels, more than any
other one nation. Fuel-oil, nitrates, steel and iron hold leading
places in the line of commodities carried.


=River Transportation.=--As has already been stated streams and rivers
were early adopted as a means for transportation. Birch-bark and
dug-out canoes, flat-boats and keel-boats, with and without sails, and
rafts were extensively used. For small boats paddles and oars furnished
the means of navigation, while several pairs of oars were utilized on
the larger boats. In shallow water poling was much in vogue. Two men by
pushing poles against the bottom of the stream from opposite sides of
a small boat could easily propel it. On still larger boats and rafts
the men as they pushed walked toward the stern as far as possible while
the craft moved through the water under them. A third man held it with
his pole until the first two regained a position near the front for
another push. By this arduous and crude means boats were propelled
up shallow but often swift currents. On the larger rivers sails were
employed. Going downstream offered little difficulty except to keep
clear of sand bars and snags. Sails, oars, and poles were sometimes
relied upon to assist the current in making speed. Large rafts of
logs and lumber made by tying timbers together with wooden pins were
floated down the rivers and broken up and sold when they reached their
destination. Furs, hides, bacon, cured hams, or jerked-meat might form
a cargo, stored during transit, in a small cabin erected at the center
of the raft, which might occupy from 400 to 600 square feet.

The construction of a practicable steamboat in 1807 by Robert
Fulton[68] and another by John Stevens, the same year, revolutionized
both river and sea navigation. While many attempts had been made
to utilize the steam engine for propelling boats, and some of them
mechanically successful, Fulton’s was the first boat built and
adapted for the conveyance of freight and passengers on a scale
commercially successful. Fulton had had the confidence and backing of
R. R. Livingston and the firm of Fulton & Livingston was formed. This
firm secured a monopoly for operating steam vessels in the waters of
the state of New York. The first boat, the _Clermont_, named after
Livingston’s estate on the Hudson River, was 130 feet long, 18 feet
beam, and 7 feet deep, with a burden of 160 tons. The Boulton & Watt
engine had been brought from England the year previous by Fulton and
the boat built for it. The vessel made a successful trial trip to
Albany, August 7 to 9, and returned the following two days; her running
speed had only averaged about 5 miles an hour, but she had demonstrated
the practicability of steam navigation on inland waters. Following
close after this event, Stevens, who had been experimenting for years
and, it is claimed, had launched a screw propeller vessel driven by
steam as early as 1804, perfected his vessel, but because of Fulton &
Livingston’s monopoly took it to the Delaware River at Philadelphia.
The trip around by sea demonstrated the feasibility of steam navigation
on the ocean. Very shortly thereafter Fulton & Livingston had placed
a fleet of their vessels on the Hudson River and Long Island Sound,
and had begun to build them at Pittsburgh while John Stevens & Sons
had their vessels on the Delaware and Connecticut Rivers. Soon all
navigable waters were covered with steam propelled vessels.

Prior to the introduction of the steamboat Mississippi River traffic
had been, as has been stated, carried on by flat boats, rafts, and
perhaps some twenty barges[69] of a better quality. These latter had
been making one round trip a year requiring sixty days down and ninety
days back from Louisville to New Orleans. This time, by 1822, had
been reduced to seven days down and sixteen days up. By 1830 all the
navigable tributaries of the Mississippi were traversed by steamboats
and the produce of a western empire teeming through the portals was
rapidly making New Orleans a great city. The value of these commodities
were given as approximating $26,000,000 annually.[70] In 1860 a writer
said: “upward of two hundred millions of dollars worth of merchandise
are annually brought to this market.”[71] New Orleans was an extremely
busy place with all the picturesqueness of pioneer cities generally.
Ranking twelfth of the cities of the United States in 1790, it had
steadily climbed up to third place in 1840,[72] when the northern
cities through the influence of the railroads and the decline of river
traffic began to outstrip it. The levee, an embankment along the river,
several feet higher than the city, was bordered by a long line of
warehouses on the land side and by quays extending into the river on
the other side. Miles of ships, boats, and barges were anchored along
the levee as automobiles are now parked along a street, heads in. A
contemporaneous writer describes it thus:

  The New Orleans levee is one continuous landing-place, or quay, 4
  miles in extent, and of an average width of 100 feet. It is 15 feet
  above low water mark, and 6 feet above the level of the city, to
  which it is graduated by an easy descent. During the business season,
  from November to July, the river front of the levee is crowded with
  vessels, of all sizes and from all quarters of the world, with
  hundreds of large and splendid steamboats, barges, flat-boats,
  etc. The levee presents a most busy and animated prospect. Here
  are seen piles of cotton bales, vast numbers of barrels of pork,
  flour and liquors of various kinds, bales of foreign and domestic
  manufactures, hogsheads of sugar, crates of ware, etc., draymen
  with their carts, buyers, sellers, laborers, etc. Valuable products
  from the head waters of the Missouri, 3000 miles distant, center
  here. The Illinois, the Ohio, the Arkansas and Red Rivers, with the
  Mississippi, are all tributaries to this commercial depot.

Under the influence of the river traffic many other cities were
springing into importance. Many of these later became centers of
railroad activity and thus retained or even bettered their rank. Others
gradually wasted away until they are mere hamlets to-day.

The times seem to have been ripe when Fulton’s _Clermont_ appeared, for
almost immediately the steamboat industry thrived. During the first ten
years 131 steam vessels had been built and by 1832, 474;[73] in 1836
and 1837, 145 and 158 respectively were launched. Building was for a
few years checked by business depression but soon revived and in 1846
there were constructed 225 steam vessels. The Civil War reduced the
number; immediately following business sprang up again and taking into
account coasts, rivers, and lakes has continued brisk ever since.

With the growth in the number of vessels, up until railroads began
to monopolize travel and freight, the accommodations and speed were
continually improved until river and sound boats were frequently
spoken of as “floating palaces.” Packets were built to accommodate
several hundred passengers, with staterooms, saloons, dining rooms,
bathrooms, barber shops, and other features. The river steamboat may
be said to be a development of the pole-boat or flat-boat. On account
of the shoals they must be broad and shallow. The paddle wheels on the
sides are operated independently in order to facilitate quick turning.
The weight of engines, boilers, fuel bunkers, freight and passenger
burden, are distributed fairly well over the entire surface. Some of
the best lower Mississippi boats had a length of hull of 300 feet, a
width of 50 feet and depth of hold of 9 feet. The boat fully loaded
drew about 10 feet of water, when light, 4 feet. “Mark twain,” 6 feet,
represented the shallowest water the vessels piloted by Samuel L.
Clemens could navigate; after quitting steam-boating he adopted that
term for a _nom-de-plume_, under which his inimitable writings were
published.[74] The main deck overhangs the hull and is about 90 feet
wide. A complete system of ties and braces above the hull gives it
strength and stiffness. Modern boats are electric lighted and have
swinging gangplanks, capstans, and all the recent power improvements
for the rapid handling of freight and passengers. The staterooms are
erected on the saloon deck with doors opening into the saloon and on
a narrow passageway along the outside. The saloon generally extends
the full length of the house, giving a large well-lighted room, used
as a lounging and dining room. Above this is another deck on which are
officers’ quarters and above all fully glassed in is the pilot house.
The freight capacity of these boats is given as 1500 tons, and there
are 70 staterooms to accommodate 140 passengers. Deck passage could be
provided for a number more. The cost of a “floating palace” was in the
’eighties from $100,000 to $120,000.

Extremely handsome, well equipped, and finely decorated boats ply
regularly on the Hudson River and on Long Island Sound. Some of the
vessels of one line are over 400 feet long and 50 feet wide. The decks
are about 90 feet wide and they have over 350 state rooms; many of them
are magnificently equipped.

O’Hanlon’s “Irish Emigrants’ Guide to the United States,” published
in 1851, would indicate that all traveling in that day was not as
comfortable as might be inferred from the preceding. With regard to
steamboats it says:

  These have been termed “flying palaces,” and many of them are fitted
  up in style of great magnificence. But the comfort of traveling by
  them is confined to cabin passengers, state rooms, accommodating two
  persons each, in separate berths, are appropriated for retirement by
  day and for rest at night; ladies and gentlemen have separate cabins,
  but dine at the same table, which is set out in the “social hall,”
  and stocked with a variety of luxuries.... The deck passengers are
  immediately under the cabin, and in the hinder part of the boat.

  A few berths are fitted up for their reception without bedding.
  Provisions must be provided at their own expense, and also a mode
  of preparing them. Sometimes numbers are huddled together on board
  without having room to move, or stretch themselves out for rest; the
  inconvenience of this mode of traveling can hardly be appreciated
  without being experienced.

It is also stated that steamboat traveling was dangerous because of
the explosions. It is true there were a number of boiler explosions.
Mark Twain mentions one of the very worst,[75] the explosion of the
_Pennsylvania_. He also discusses the subject of racing, which after
the Government rules regarding steam pressure went into effect, he
claims not to have been dangerous. One of the later races, that between
the _Robert E. Lee_ and the _Natchez_ in 1870 was an event of national
interest. The time of the _Robert E. Lee_ from New Orleans to St. Louis
was 3 days 18 hours and 14 minutes from dock to dock. Mark Twain claims
the fastest long-distance running was made by the _Eclipse_ in 1855
when she made the trip from New Orleans to Cairo at an average speed
“a shade under fourteen and three-eighths miles per hour.”  An idea
of the rates charged for passenger fare and for freight traffic on
steam-boats may be obtained from the following.

In 1816 from New York to Albany the fare was $7, about 4 cents per
mile. For way stations between about 5 cents per mile, but no charge
less than $1.[76]

STEAMBOAT FARES

  ----+----------------------+--------+------------------------
      |                      |        |          FARE
      |                      |        +-----+------------------
  Date|       Between        |Distance|Total|  Per Mile Cents
  ----+----------------------+--------+-----+------------------
  1816|New York and Albany   |   145  |$7.00| 4
  1817|New York to Providence|   200  |10.00| 5
  1825|Boston to Portland    |   160  | 5.00| 3
  1825|Boston to Bath        |        | 6.00|      }
  1825|Boston to Augusta     |        | 7.00|      } With meals
  1825|Boston to East Port   |   275  |11.00| 4    }
  1848|New York to Albany    |   145  |  .50|  .3}
  1848|New York to Erie      |   600  | 7.50| 1.3}
  1848|New York to Detroit   |   825  | 8.50| 1  }
  1848|New York to Chicago   |  1520  |12.50|  .7}[77]
  1848|Baltimore to Richmond |   378  |10.00|    }
  1848|Tuscaloosa to Mobile  |   675  |12.00|    }
  1848|Boston and New York   |Sailing}|     |    }
      | to New Orleans       |Packet }|40-50|    }
  ----+----------------------+--------+-----+------------------

In 1817 from Rhode Island to New York, $10, approximately 5 cents per
mile.


=The Government’s Attitude Toward River Improvement.=--The individual
states had been encouraging turnpikes, canals, and other interior
improvements by subscribing and underwriting stock in private companies
authorized to build and operate the improvements. Frequently monopolies
were granted to operating companies.[78] States were jealous of each
other and hesitated to appropriate money for improvements which would
inure to the benefit of another state, and frequently an improvement
in one state was worthless unless joining improvements could be made
in neighboring states. Many men, believing in a large and unified
nation rather than a confederation of several small nations advocated
governmental action. Strict constitutionalists and states’ rights men
objected. President Madison had vetoed Calhoun’s Bonus Bill for roads
and canals upon the ground that the constitution did not vest Congress
with power to undertake such improvements.[79] Calhoun had used all the
power of his great eloquence based upon the “common defense and general
welfare” clause of the constitution in favor of such improvements.
He considered it the duty of Congress to “bind the republic together
with a perfect system of roads and canals.” He exclaimed that the
very extent of the country “exposes us to the greatest of all
calamities,--next to the loss of liberty,--and even to that in its
consequences--disunion. We are great, and rapidly--I was about to say
fearfully growing. This is our pride and our danger; our weakness and
our strength. We are under the most imperious obligation to counteract
every tendency to disunion.... Whatever impedes the intercourse of the
extremes with this, the center of the Republic, weakens the Union.”[80]

Monroe’s first message indicated that he followed Madison in the belief
that Congress was not empowered by the constitution to establish
internal improvements; and later he vetoed a measure to authorize the
president to erect toll houses along the Cumberland Road, appoint
toll gatherers and otherwise regulate its use, on the ground that it
exceeded the power of congress. He favored internal improvements but
thought a constitutional amendment necessary.[81]

The next year, however, some bills for internal improvements got
through among them the first act for the improvement of harbors. In
1802, under the influence of Gallatin, Randolph and Jefferson, 5 per
cent of the Ohio lands sold were appropriated for the building of
roads.[82] In 1809 was passed the first act for river improvement.[83]

These were the beginnings of National aid for internal improvements in
the United States. The “implied powers” adherents seem to have been in
the ascendency for a report of the treasurer shows that up to 1830 the
United States had appropriated for internal improvements--Cumberland
Road, $2,443,420.20; subscriptions to canal stock and improvements
of the Mississippi and Ohio Rivers, $1,263,315.65; for other items
such as building of piers, preservation of ports and piers, making
roads and removing river obstructions, $1,603,694.31. It was pointed
out that only $234,955.92[84] had been expended in the territories
where the question of constitutionality did not arise. Presidents
had nearly always declared in favor of internal improvements but
desired that constitutional provision be made for the same. Jackson,
a strong state sovereignty man, suggested that the surplus funds of
the Government be distributed among the several states in proportion
to their representation in Congress; and in 1830 vetoed a bill for
subscription to the stock of one canal and pocketed others, and closed
his administration by pocketing a bill for the improvement of the
Wabash River. While Jackson’s attitude checked federal appropriations,
especially for roads and canals, those for rivers and harbors became
almost a national scandal, and were with other public appropriation
bills frequently referred to as “pork bills.” A congressional
appropriation, whether for rivers and harbors, a federal building,
or an irrigation project, brought considerable money into a state;
it was considered a feather in the cap of a congressman and enhanced
his chances for reelection. Consequently nearly every congressman
introduced such an act for his district and “log-rolling” schemes
were entered into by many to procure their passage. River and harbor
appropriations continued to increase until 1882, when they amounted
to the vast sum of $18,743,875 to be applied to some 500 different
localities. President Arthur[85] vetoed the bill, but Congress passed
it over the veto and the “barrel of pork” was divided up as usual. The
publicity given the matter checked appropriations for a while but they
soon climbed higher than ever. The appropriation for the fiscal year of
1920 was $33,378,364.[86]


SELECTED REFERENCES

  ARTHUR, PRESIDENT CHESTER A., Veto of river and harbor bill,
  Richardson’s “Messages and Papers,” VIII, pp. 120-122.

  BARNARD, CHARLES, “Inland Navigation of the United States,” _The
  Century Magazine_, Vol. XXXVIII, pp. 353-372.

  CALHOUN, JOHN C., “Works of.” Edited by Richard K. Cralle, 6 volumes,
  1853-1855. Vol. II, p. 190. D. Appleton & Company, New York.

  Canals.--“Report of the Committee on Roads and Canals (of the House
  of Representatives) in reply to memorials of Chesapeake & Ohio Canal,
  Baltimore and Ohio Railroad, and inhabitants of Virginia, Maryland,
  and Pennsylvania, asking additional subscriptions by the United
  States to the capital stock of the Canal.” Report No. 414, H. of R.
  23d Cong. 1st Sess., pp. 378 et seq.

  DUNBAR, SEYMOUR, “History of Travel in America,” 4 volumes,
  Bobbs-Merrill Company, Indianapolis.

  GREELEY, HORACE, “Recollections of a Busy Life.” J. B. Ford & Co.,
  New York, 1869.

  HAZARD, GEORGE S., “The Erie Canal. Its National Character.”
  Published by order of Board of Trade, Buffalo, N. Y., 1873.

  HOWE, HENRY, “Historical Sketch of the West.”

  “Isthmian Canal Commission Report,” Sen. Doc., 57th Congress, 1st
  session, No. 54.

  Johnson’s Cyclopaedia. Article on Canals.

  MACDONALD, WILLIAM, “Jacksonian Democracy,” Vol. XV of the American
  Nation Series, Chapter VIII, “Internal Improvements.” Harper &
  Brothers, New York.

  MCMASTER, JOHN BACH, “History of the United States,” Vol. V, Chap.
  XLIV. D. Appleton & Company, New York, 1911.

  O’HANLON, REV. J., “Irish Emigrant’s Guide of the United States,”
  Boston, 1851.

  Panama Canal.--Financial Statement to June 30, 1919, The American
  Year Book for the year 1919, p. 364, D. Appleton & Co., New York.

  RICHARDSON, JAMES D., “Messages and Papers,” Vol. I, 584, President
  Madison’s Veto of Calhoun’s Bonus Bill. Published by order of
  Congress, 8 Vols., Washington, 1896-1899.

  ROOSEVELT, PRESIDENT THEODORE, “Messages to Congress,” January 4,
  1904, Sen. Doc. 58th Sess., No. 53, pp. 5-26.

  SMITH, THEODORE C., “Parties and Slavery,” Vol. XVIII, of the
  American Nation Series, Harper & Brothers, New York.

  SPARKS, EDWIN E., “National Development,” Vol. XXIII of the American
  Nation Series, Chapters IV and XIII, Harper & Brothers, New York.

  THAYER, WM. R., “Theodore Roosevelt,” p. 178 et seq. Grosset &
  Dunlap, New York.

  THAYER, WM. R., “John Hay,” Vol. II, pp. 339-41. Houghton Mifflin
  Company, Boston, 1915.

  TURNER, FREDERICK J., “Rise of the New West,” Vol. XIV of the
  American Nation Series, Chapter VIII, “Western Trade and Ideals,”
  Harper & Brothers, New York.

  TWAIN, MARK (Clemens, S. L.), “Life on the Mississippi,” Harper &
  Brothers, New York.

  U. S. Census review of “Agencies of Transportation,” 1880.

  WARNER, I. W., “Immigrant’s Guide and Citizen’s Manual.” New York,
  1848.


FOOTNOTES

  [47] “American Nation,” Vol. XIV, p. 32.

  [48] McMaster, “United States,” Vol. V.

  [49]

  Length of Miami and Erie Canal    301.49 miles
     „    „ Ohio Canal              512.26
     „    „ Penn. and Ohio Canal     76
     „    „ Sandy and Beaver Canal   79
     „    „ Whitewater Canal         32
                                   -------
                         Total     1000.75 miles

  --Dunbar’s “History of Travel in America”.


  [50]

  Total mileage of boats clearing from
    Fort Wayne in 1849                      209,982
    LaFayette                               162,297

  Total mileage by passengers from and to
    Fort Wayne in 1849                      519,336
    LaFayette                               505,397

  “Annual Report of the Trustees of the Wabash and Erie Canal,” 1849.

  [51] U. S. Census review of “Agencies of Transportation,” 1880.

  [52] Johnson’s Cyclopaedia.

  [53] “Recollections of a Busy Life,” by Horace Greeley.

  [54] “A History of Travel in America,” Dunbar.

  [55] Smith: “Parties and Slavery,” (“American Nation,” Vol. XVIII).

  [56] Democratic Platform, 1856.

  [57] _North American Review_, Vol. CXXXII, p. 107.

  [58] “American Nation,” Vol. XXIII.

  [59] “Theodore Roosevelt,” by W. R. Thayer, 180. “John Hay,” by W. R.
  Thayer, II, 339-41.

  [60] Isthmian Canal Commission Report, Sen. Doc. 57th Congress., 1st
  session, No. 54.

  [61] Message of January 4, 1904, Sen. Doc., 58th Cong. 2nd Sess. No.
  53, pp. 5-26.

  [62] “Theodore Roosevelt,” by William Roscoe Thayer, p. 184 et seq.

  [63] Letter to Albert Shaw by President Theodore Roosevelt. _Literary
  Digest_, October 29, 1904.

  [64] “Theodore Roosevelt,” by W. R. Thayer, p. 190.

  [65] “Theodore Roosevelt,” by W. R. Thayer, p. 186.

  [66] “The American Year Book,” 1919. Appleton, N. Y.

  [67] _Panama Canal Record._

  [68] For a long list of steamboats built in America, and operated
  under their own power prior to Fulton’s _Clermont_, see “A History of
  Travel in America,” by Seymour Dunbar.

  [69] “American Nation,” Vol. XIV.

  [70] “American Nation,” Vol. XIV, p. 105.

  [71] Henry Howe, “Historical Sketch of the West.”

  [72] Statistical Atlas 1900. 12th Census of the U. S.

  [73] Charles Barnard in _The Century Magazine_, Vol. XXXVIII,
  from which also is derived information relative to dimensions and
  decorations of steam vessels, pp. 353-372.

  [74] See “Life on the Mississippi,” by Mark Twain, p. 117.

  [75] “Life on the Mississippi,” by Mark Twain, Chapter XX.

  [76] Dunbar, “A History of Travel in America.”

  [77] Warner’s “Immigrant’s Guide and Citizen’s Manual.”

  [78] March 18, 1786, John Fitch was granted by New Jersey “the sole
  and exclusive right of constructing making using and employing or
  navigating, all and every species or kind of boats, impelled by the
  force of fire or steam” within the limits of that state. Delaware
  gave him similar rights in 1787 and New York, likewise, the same
  year. In 1798 Fitch’s grant in New York, which was to have run
  fourteen years, was canceled and Livingston given a monopoly for
  twenty years providing within a year he run a steamboat at four miles
  an hour. This he failed to do, but got his grant renewed in 1803, and
  again extended until the successful operation of the _Clermont_ in
  1807.

  [79] “Messages and Papers,” Richardson, I, 584.

  [80] Calhoun: “Works II,” 190. “American Nation” XIII, 253.

  [81] “American Nation,” XIV, 231.

  [82] “Laws of the United States,” VI., 120.

  [83] MacDonald, “American Nation” Vol. XV, 134.

  [84] “American Nation,” Vol. XV, pp. 136-137.

  [85] Richardson, “Messages and Papers,” VIII, 120-122.

  [86] “The American Year Book,” 208.




CHAPTER IV

RAILROADS


During the period of the development of the canals there was growing
up along side of them an agency for transportation that was destined
practically to put them out of business. Engineers in both Europe and
America were straining every energy to apply the steam engine to the
propulsion of wagons along a highway. No one at first looked upon the
railroad as a separate and distinct industry. For years upon roads over
which there was much hauling of heavy loads planks had been placed
in the tracks to prevent rutting. These planks had developed into
rigidly set timbers or rails either attached to cross timbers or to
stones set in the roadway. A little later iron straps were fastened
to the tops of the rails to lessen wear and friction. It was found
that a horse could haul on these tramways several times as much as
he could on the dirt roadway. The steam engine had revolutionized
industry and was turning all sorts of machinery with an efficiency
unknown before, why then could it not be applied to propel vehicles?
In England George Stephenson and associates were proving that it
could. But prior to their time many thinkers of America believed in
it. John Fitch, the half crazy inventor of an early steamboat, had
built a model locomotive. Oliver Evans, who had placed wheels under
a steamboat of his invention (1804) and run it over the streets of
Philadelphia, predicted “The time will come when people will travel
in stages moved by steam engines, from one city to another, almost as
fast as birds fly, fifteen to twenty miles an hour.” His vision went
still further; he saw what most people think to be absolutely modern
innovations: “A carriage will set out from Washington in the morning,
the passengers will breakfast at Baltimore, dine at Philadelphia, and
sup at New York, the same day ... and travel by night as well as by
day; and the passengers will sleep in these stages as comfortably as
they do now in steamboats.”[87] Evans antedated Stephenson’s thought
that speed with a locomotive could only be made on nearly level
rails. John Stevens, who is often spoken of as the father of American
railroads, of course, had similar beliefs, and wrote a pamphlet to
impress his ideas of the importance of railways upon Congress. He
said: “I am anxious and ambitious that my native country should have
the honor of being the first to introduce an improvement of such
immense importance to society at large, and should feel the utmost
reluctance at being compelled to resort to foreigners in the first
instance.”[88] Had Congress not turned a deaf ear to him it is quite
possible that he might have been before Stephenson in demonstrating the
practicability of the locomotive.[89] Stevens built a small locomotive
and demonstrated it on a piece of track on his grounds with himself as
passenger in 1820. Several tramways or railroads operated by horse were
established in different parts of the country. One of them--sponsored
by the people of Baltimore, anxious to retain their trade--was the
Baltimore & Ohio Railroad, which had secured from Maryland, Virginia,
and Pennsylvania charters for its construction in 1827 and 1828. It
was being built with many curves, as it, too, was expected to have
horse propulsion. Many persons thought it should be made straighter in
order to take advantage of the steam locomotive when the inventors had
perfected it sufficiently to be usable. It was not considered feasible
to operate locomotives on crooked roads. Peter Cooper, justly praised
for many benefits to his country, decided to build a locomotive to
prove it could run on a crooked track. In his own words: “Under these
discouraging circumstances many of the principal stockholders were
about to abandon the work, and were only prevented from forfeiting
their stock by my persuading them that a locomotive could be so made
as to pass successfully around the short curves then found in the
road.”[90]

Accordingly in 1829 Cooper fitted up a small engine and boiler on a
flat car and with that crude locomotive, the _Tom Thumb_, was able to
demonstrate that curves could be “navigated.” Having made some changes
in the _Tom Thumb_, Cooper, the next year, ran it over the 13 miles
from Baltimore to Ellicott’s Mills in an hour and a quarter, an average
of 6 miles per hour, returning in sixty-one minutes, including a stop
of four minutes. The engine pushed ahead of it a flat car carrying
twenty-four passengers. The wheels of the engine had been constructed
on the “cone principle” which allowed it to round the curves of 400
feet radius without trouble.[91] This was the first time a car filled
with passengers had been hauled over a railroad in the United States by
means of steam power.

In England steam engines had been tried out but not until 1820 was the
first commercial road, the Stockton & Darlington Railroad, 37 miles in
length, completed. Prior to this time the tram roads had been erected
for specialized private transportation (from colliery to canal, for
instance) or as improvements to the public highways. The Stockton &
Darlington was intended to be operated with horses. And even as late
as 1828 the Liverpool & Manchester Railroad, intended primarily to
haul freight and relieve the congested condition of the canals, was
chartered with a provision that the owners could exact toll of all
who might put vehicles on the road for the transport of goods. The
engineer, George Stephenson, however, was a strong advocate of steam
power and the success of the _Rocket_, built by his son Robert, in
1829, as this road was nearing completion, definitely determined the
power to be used. Roads in America followed the same idea that they
were public highways. In Pennsylvania the state built a railroad from
Philadelphia to Columbia and licensed over twenty different companies
to run their horse-drawn cars over it.[92] In other states the same
idea prevailed and the right to charge tolls “upon all passengers and
property” transported upon the road was legalized by the charter.

The utility and economy of the railways were so manifest that
organizations were formed rapidly over the whole well settled portions
of the country. Several locomotives were imported from England. One
of these, the _John Bull_ (locomotives were for a number of years all
named like sleeping cars are now), brought over by Stevens & Son, is
said to have given Baldwin information which enabled him to build
_Old Ironsides_, the first locomotive to run on Pennsylvania tracks,
and establish a business which afterwards became one of the largest
locomotive works in the world. _Old Ironsides_ was built by Matthias
Baldwin and his brother-in-law Rufus Tyler for the Philadelphia,
Germantown & Norristown Road. Tyler seems to have made the drawings.
Baldwin was by trade a jeweler but his mechanical ingenuity had carried
him further. He had added to his business that of constructing tools
and calico printing apparatus and machinery. He had built a steam
engine for his own shop. A museum operator in Philadelphia desiring
to add to the attractions of his place of amusement wished to put in
a miniature locomotive and railway. He applied to Baldwin, who built
the road with its small locomotive and cars. On April 25, 1831, its
installation was completed and it hauled two four-seated passenger cars
about a circular track, to the great delight of the patrons, who were
anxious for the experience of riding on the railroad.

[Illustration: THE EVOLUTION OF THE RAILWAY TRAIN

  1. The First Railway Coach--1825.
  2. Horse Power Locomotive--1829-30.
  3. Stourbridge Lion--1829.
  4. Stevenson’s Rocket Locomotive--1829.
  5. The DeWitt Clinton Locomotive--1831.

(From Brown’s “First Locomotive”--Courtesy of D. Appleton & Company.)]

One of the roads that seems to have been prolific in “first things”
was between Charleston and Hamburg, South Carolina. Chartered in 1827,
again in 1828. In 1829-30 it experimented with sailing cars, as did
also the Baltimore & Ohio and with treadmill horse powers. But the
company fortunately employed Horatio Allen, who had studied the English
roads and was strongly inclined to steam power. He so convincingly
presented his ideas that it was decided to strengthen construction
and use such locomotives. This then, very likely, was the first
railroad in the world to adopt formally the steam locomotive as its
means of propulsion (January 14, 1830). The company accordingly built
its lines substantially and placed upon them the “first locomotive
made in America for regular and practical use on a railway.”[93]
This locomotive known as the _Best Friend of Charleston_ was built
in New York and shipped to Charleston by sea. After some adjustments
it satisfied the demands of the contract, but distinguished itself
by being the first locomotive to explode. It is said a negro fireman
sat upon or held down the safety valve to prevent escaping steam
from annoying him. The _Charleston Courier’s_ account closes with
the gratifying information that “none of the persons are dangerously
injured except the negro, who had his thigh broken.” A new locomotive,
the _West Point_, was secured, upon which several improvements
suggested by experience had been made; among them the safety valve was
placed out of reach of the fireman, making it fool-proof.

The beginning of the New York Central may be traced to a charter
granted in 1826 to the Mohawk & Hudson Company, which with five or six
other small lines was joined together into that company. Its first
locomotive, the _De Witt Clinton_, had a rather interesting initiation.
The engine was constructed by the West Point foundry, the same concern
that had built the _Best Friend_ and the _West Point_. A demonstration
was announced for August 9, 1831, the road having 17 miles of rails at
that time. The locomotive, a small affair compared with the modern
engines, is still in existence and with its train of that day was
exhibited at the Pageant of Progress, Chicago, July 30, 1921, as the
“pioneer American steam passenger train.” The whole engine was only
about 12 feet long with large wheels, tall smoke stack and a central
steam dome. Back of it were the tender and wood for fuel and two
barrels of water, two passenger coaches modeled after stage coaches,
and following these several small flat cars to which had been attached
temporary benches for seats. The locomotive and cars were joined
together with short sections of strong chain. When the engine started
these jerked so badly the passengers could not retain their seats;
stopping had a similar effect. On the trip it is said the passengers
appropriated rails from a near fence and made braces to keep the cars
the full length of the chains apart. The wood fuel produced many sparks
which flying backward set fire to and ruined much of the passengers’
clothing. But according to a newspaper report[94] the train “passed
over the road from plane to plane, to the delight of a large crowd
assembled to witness the performance. The engine performed the entire
route in less than one hour, including stoppages, and on a part of the
road its speed was at the rate of 30 miles an hour.”

On May 10, 1893, Engine No. 999, of the New York Central Railroad,
made, traveling alone, a record of 112.5 miles an hour.

The Camden & Amboy road was chartered in 1830 and was somewhat unique
in that New Jersey in return for $200,000 worth of stock had granted
a monopoly of the right of way between Philadelphia and Newark. Poore
says:[95] “The state became a willing party to the scheme, under the
idea that it could thereby draw the means for supporting its government
from citizens of other States, thus relieving its own from the burdens
of taxation.” He says, “the state now (1860) derives a revenue of
over $200,000 annually from transit duties and dividends on the stock
presented to it.”

NewEngland started three railway projects about the same time: Boston
& Lowell, chartered in 1830 first used in 1834, 26.7 miles long;
Boston & Providence, chartered in 1831, first used in 1834, 43.5
miles long; and the Boston & Worcester, chartered in 1831, first used
in 1834, 44.6 miles long.[96] These roads were chartered with the
idea of using horse-drawn vehicles, except the Boston & Worcester,
where steam locomotives were authorized, but it was not until about
1834 that they were used. Some of these roads, as did most of those
built farther west, followed the English practice of laying track.
One of them, at least, laid its track upon wooden cross-ties, thus
securing the necessary resiliency for service. It was not many years,
however, before several other roads were established with regular
trips of locomotive drawn cars arranged both for passenger and freight
traffic. The time of passenger service from Boston to New York had
been materially shortened by connecting the schedules of stage coaches
to Providence with those of steamboats down the Sound. When the steam
railway came into existence the time of the trip was again shortened,
and still again when an all rail route was opened in 1848, as shown by
the following table:

  1775 General Washington was 12 days en route.
       Early coaches required a week.
  1800 Stage coaches required 4 days.
  1832 Stage coaches required 41 hours.
  1822 Coach to Providence, steamboat to New York, 28 hours.
  1835 Coach to Providence, steamboat to New York, 16 hours.
  1835 Railway to Providence, steamboat to New York, 15 hours.
  1848 All railway, 10 hours.
  1922 All railway, 5 hours, 10 minutes.
  1922 Air plane, 3 hours.

While the railroads of the East were gradually working west, the
trans-Alleghany states were themselves looking toward railroad
transportation. The first railway in Ohio was begun in 1835 and had
completed 30 miles by 1840. It extended from Sandusky to Springfield.
When it was chartered, 1832, under the name of the Mad River & Lake
Erie Railway, the intention was to connect Lake Erie with the Ohio
River. A locomotive was purchased and shipped to Sandusky by canal
and lake. It arrived before any track was laid hence the gauge of the
track was made to fit the locomotive, 4 feet 10 inches. Other roads in
Ohio were laid at that gauge and in time the state adopted that as a
standard.

Michigan in 1832, then a territory, incorporated the Detroit & St.
Joseph Railroad Company. After several years without doing anything the
road was completed to Ann Arbor in 1840. Later its western terminal
became New Buffalo, from which point there was steamboat communication
with Chicago. This was the germ which has grown into the Michigan
Central.

A railroad was begun from Frankfort, Kentucky, to Lexington, a few
miles from the pioneer settlement at Boonesborough. By 1840 this
road had extended to the Ohio River near Louisville and was 92 miles
in length. Indiana chartered not less than a half-dozen railways in
1832 and continued with a score or more in the next few years. The
Lawrenceburg & Indianapolis line, chartered 1832, was opened with a
Fourth of July celebration, 1834, and had laid less than 2 miles of
track by 1836.[97] The Madison & Indianapolis road was opened in 1838.
The report of the principal engineer, 1837, states that “the exclusive
use of steam as a motive power” had been adopted, thus saving “the cost
of a horse path” and avoiding “the delay and confusion arising from the
simultaneous use of both steam and horse power,” as well as elevating
the “character of the road by greater dispatch in the conveyance of
passengers.” He thinks “in the use of the railroads constructed by the
state it will probably be best for the state to furnish the motive
power, leaving the cars for the conveyance of freight and passengers
to be furnished by individuals or companies, from whom the state will
exact the proper toll for the use of the road, and for the motive
power.” The idea seems everywhere to have prevailed that a railway was
a public highway to be used by and for the benefit of the public. Only
for a very short time in the history of the country did the theory have
prominence that a railway is private property to the extent that its
owners could do as they pleased with it and the “public be damned.”

At various points in the South were railways projected and built.
Besides the Charleston & Hamburg, which has already been mentioned,
and which by 1850 had extended across the state to Hamburg directly
across the Savannah River from Augusta, Georgia, and northward to
Columbia with some branches, should be noted a few others. From
Richmond there was a line westward to the coal fields (1830-31) and
a line which by 1840 connected the Potomac with Fredericksburg, a
distance of 75 miles. It was constructed in the ordinary manner of
wooden rails with strap-iron plates. In Virginia there were the
Petersburg & Roanoke, about 60 miles long and other lines sufficient
to total in 1840 more than 300 miles. North Carolina also took up
the rail question rather early. The Wilmington & Raleigh, chartered
in 1833, had laid upwards of 160 miles in 1840. Georgia was building
lines in the ’thirties and ’forties from Augusta across the state to
link with lines in Tennessee. The lines of these several Southeastern
states were joined together later and became parts of large systems.
Of the several projects authorized amounting to more than 1000 miles
(1837) only one materialized, namely, the road from Springfield to
Meredosia, and 58 miles had been completed by 1842. A locomotive was
purchased and according to the Springfield _Journal_, March 18, “the
cars ran from Jacksonville, 33¹⁄₂ miles, in two hours and eight minutes
including stoppages.” On account of the unsettled condition of the
country and the accidents along the way,--no doubt the track was poorly
constructed,--it did not pay. The locomotive for a considerable time
lay out in the open where it had jumped the track. A man bought it,
equipped it with wide tired wheels and attempted to operate it on the
wagon roads. This proved unsuccessful and it was finally abandoned on
the prairie.[98] The road was sold in 1847. Several roads were reaching
out for the Mississippi River and the fertile prairies beyond. The
bustling young city of Chicago began its first railway toward the west
in 1848. The other extremity was set for Galena on the Mississippi
River. Not being financially able to buy T-rails they purchased
some second-hand strap-irons. Likewise a second-hand locomotive was
obtained, but when it arrived at the water front in Chicago the city
authorities having refused the privilege of laying tracks on the street
the company was at a loss to know how to get it to the end of their
rails. After much discussion permission to lay a temporary track was
given, and the _Pioneer_ finally reached her destination. The railway
proved successful from the first; later it became part of the Illinois
Central System. The locomotive _Pioneer_ is still retained in the Field
Museum of Chicago.

There is not space to trace the development of the railways in all
the individual states. In all natural growths, increases at first
are slow, then accelerated until a maximum is reached, followed by a
gradual retardation. So with the railway growth. The number of miles of
railroad constructed up to 1830 was 41; 1835, 918; to 1840, 2797; in
small widely scattered locations, but from that time on to the Civil
War the work went on rapidly. By 1860 about 31,000 miles had been
constructed and was going on at the rate of 5000 miles per year. Seven
trunk line roads had passed through the Appalachian Mountain system; at
eight places they and their connections touched the Ohio River, and the
Mississippi at ten.[99] By 1850 there was railway connection between
Boston and the east end of Lake Erie, and from the west end of Lake
Erie to Lake Michigan with steamboat connection across the two lakes;
before 1860 there was a network of rails between the Atlantic seaboard
and the Mississippi River. Construction lagged behind in the South. Up
to 1856 the building was approximately as follows:

  Northeastern States       4000 miles
  Northern Central States   7500   „
  South Atlantic States     2750   „
  Southern Interior         2150   „

And the very fact that few of these were north and south roads, that
travel and intercourse were east and west, that the people of the
North did not fraternize with the people of the South, that they grew
apart and worshiped at the shrine of different ideals, furnished at
least one cause for the cruel Civil War. There are still too few north
and south trunk lines of travel and commerce, too little trade and
friendly intercourse to heal the differences engendered by a century of
separation. There lies one of the hopes of the interchange of summer
and winter automobile visitors.

The building of railroads offered an opening for surplus capital; the
opportunity for fortune and fame was attractive; but above all the
people were crazed with the idea of improvement; every town wanted
to grow bigger and a railroad was an absolute necessity; scores of
companies were formed with the intention of beginning construction,
then deeding the improvement to some established line to operate. Many
communities subscribed stock, others voted bonds, others paid for right
of way by private subscription in order to secure a railroad. Mob
psychology had got in its work; the people were frenzied. The result
was often overbuilding, parallel lines, too many roads attempting to
occupy the same territory, with the result that branch lines often
never paid interest on the cost of construction. On the other hand the
gambling instinct was rampant, many roads were overcapitalized, stock
was voted influential persons without money consideration, and stock
sold to others for more than it was worth.

As there had been for turnpikes, as there had been for canals, once
again there came a popular call for governmental aid. Land was
then plenty and the general belief was that the prosperity of the
country demanded its settlement. If railways could be induced to go
out into the open prairies and by their selling agencies bring about
the occupation and tillage of these lands, other lands owned by the
Government would soon be in demand. There would be no particular
hardship on anyone, since Government land was sold to actual settlers
for such a small sum, the railroads would be unable to dispose of their
land at a much larger price. As a matter of fact the land was sold by
the railroads for whatever it would bring; the prices increased as
settlement became more dense. In Iowa railroad land sold from $5 to $50
per acre during the ’sixties and ’seventies. The remaining land held by
the government was ordinarily increased in price from $1.25 to $2.50
per acre.

Congress, evidently influenced by the demand for railroads, and falling
back upon the precedent of the National Highway, heretofore mentioned,
granted in 1850 to the State of Illinois a strip of land about 12
miles wide lengthwise through the state to be transferred by it to the
Illinois Central Railroad. The act gave six sections per mile on each
side of the track, amounting, as certified to later, 2,595,053 acres.
In consideration of this and in lieu of all other taxes, the company
agreed to pay the state an amount equal to 7 per cent of the gross
earnings from freight and passenger traffic. The company had received
from the sale (principal and advanced interest) of 2,250,633 acres, up
to January 1, 1873, $24,296,596;[100] an average of about $11 per acre.

Other companies were quick to take advantage of this precedent. Each
had its representative in Congress. For over twenty years there was
scarcely a Congress that did not make one or two such grants. More
than a hundred such grants[101] were made between 1850 and 1872,
aggregating 155,000,000 acres.[102] Several roads did not comply with
the conditions of the grants hence the donation lapsed. Up to June 30,
1880, grants amounted to 155,504,994.59 acres, according to Donaldson,
of which there had been patented to the same date, 35,214,978.25 acres.


=Pacific Roads.=--The most gigantic land grants made by the Government
were for the benefit of the trans-continental or Pacific roads. The
idea of a transcontinental railroad has been traced back practically
to the beginning of railroad building in the United States.[103]
During the ’fifties the debates in Congress waxed strong. Should the
states’ sovereignty idea prevail and federal aid be first granted to
the states and dealt out by them to the builders as had been done with
the Illinois Central and numerous other cases, or should the National
Government undertake the work itself or grant the aid to a company
for that purpose? Where would the road be built: in the North, which
would give an advantage to the abolitionists, or in the South, with
corresponding advantage to slavery partisans? The two classes were
absolutely antagonistic to each other’s desires. Then there was a
middle class, who desired to prevent separation and war who refused to
vote upon either side for fear it would create trouble with the other.

As a compromise a bill was passed in 1853 to have the country west of
the Mississippi River surveyed to determine the most feasible region
for building the transcontinental railroad. The report of the survey
is contained in eleven volumes, and was made by the War Department, of
which Jefferson Davis was the Secretary. This cabinet officer reported
in favor of “the route of the 32d parallel” as the “most practical and
economical from the Mississippi River to the Pacific Ocean.”[104]
A line this far south, of course, was not acceptable to the North.
The election and Civil War coming on changed the status of affairs
and on July 4, 1862, President Lincoln signed the bill by which the
first transcontinental road should be constructed by two companies:
the Central Pacific working from the west, and the Union Pacific
working from the Missouri River at Omaha westward. A grant of land of
approximately 35,000,000 acres was made, namely, the odd sections lying
contiguous to the line on either side. This was not quite a return to
the position of the Government when it built out of the funds from the
sale of public lands the National Road westward from Maryland, through
Pennsylvania, Ohio, Indiana, into Illinois. Then the construction
was done under the direction of the federal Government and the road
remained the property of the Government. Now federal aid was given to
private companies to be operated for their own benefit. What might have
been the result in this country had the Government taken a firm stand
for national ownership is problematical, but the fact that it has made
a success of the construction and operation of the Panama Canal leads
many to believe that the railroad question would have been handled
as easily if that system had grown up from the beginning. Opponents
of government ownership point to the roads of continental Europe as
being less efficient than those of England and the United States under
private ownership. And more recently the fiasco of Government operation
under war emergency is considered a strong argument against public
ownership.

In addition to the land granted to the Union Pacific for the “purpose
of aiding in the construction of said railroad and telegraph line, and
to secure the safe and speedy transportation of the mails, troops,
munitions of war, and public stores thereon, every alternate section
of land, designated by odd numbers, to the amount of five alternate
sections per mile on each side of said road,”[105] the company
was given for “right of way” 200 feet each side of the track,[106]
“including all necessary grounds” for stations, side-tracks and various
other purposes enumerated, also to take from the public land “adjacent
to the line of said road” (afterwards limited to 10 miles on each
side) “earth, stone, timber, and other materials, for the construction
thereof.” Further help was also granted by the provisions of the act
(Section 5): “That ... the Secretary of the Treasury shall, upon the
certificate in writing ... of the completion and equipment of forty
consecutive miles ... issue ... bonds of the United States of one
thousand dollars each, payable in thirty years after date, bearing six
per centum per annum interest ... to the amount of sixteen of said
bonds per mile.” The act provides that this loan shall constitute a
first mortgage lien on the property, but the act of 1864 allowed the
company to issue bonds to the same amount and subrogate the Government
bonds to those issued by the company making the Government claim a
second mortgage instead of a first. The Government gave similar grants
and privileges to the Central Pacific, although it was a purely state
corporation and, at first, was only to build to the east line of
California. Apparently the last vestige of the traditions of Madison
and Monroe, of Jackson and Buchanan had disappeared.

There was danger that other lines would be built. A line was preparing
to go west from Leavenworth, lines were converging on St. Joseph and
Sioux City, any of which might become rivals of the Union Pacific, so
the act provides that they shall unite with the Pacific not farther
west than the one hundredth meridian of longitude, and if they do so
grants of lands and subsidy bonds will be given to them.

However, the demand for transcontinental lines was so great that three
other lines were authorized. In 1864 the Northern Pacific Railroad
to connect Lake Superior with Puget Sound, with a land grant of
58,000,000 acres; in the Atlantic & Pacific to follow the old 32d
parallel route, now a part of the Southern Pacific, with a grant of
42,000,000 acres; and last, the Atchison, Topeka & Santa Fé received
also a large grant. The total Congressional grants certified or
patented to railroads and military wagon roads from 1850 to 1880 were
as follows:

  To States                                          35,214,978.25 acres
  To Corporation and Pacific Roads                   10,435,048.08
  Military Wagon Roads                                1,301,040.47
                                                     -------------
                                                     46,951,066.80
  Deduct lands forfeited                                607,741.76
                                                     -------------
  Grand Total for Railroads and Military Wagon
  Roads                                              46,343,325.04

  Acres necessary to fill grants providing all
  roads are constructed                             155,504,994.59[107]


=Construction of Pacific Roads.=--It would be interesting to take up
in detail the work of constructing these roads, but space will not
permit. Nothing can be said of the intense interest throughout the
United States; of the romance and adventure of penetrating 1700 miles
of wilderness and desert with hostile Indians ready at any time to
attack; with worse than hostile Indians in the rough-necks, gamblers,
and prostitutes who followed the camps; of the magnitude of the work
employing 2000 graders to go first, 1500 wood choppers and tie-getters
spreading their labors over thousands of miles of Government forests;
of the engineers and their feats of searching out easiest passages;
of the track layers; of the boarding houses; of general camp life; of
the exciting race with the Central Pacific ending in the union of the
two lines and the driving of the golden spike at Promontory Point on
the north shore of Great Salt Lake, 1086 miles westward from Omaha and
689 miles eastward from Sacramento, on the 10th day of May, 1869; and
of the crowds in Omaha, Chicago, Cincinnati, New Orleans, Washington,
New York, San Francisco, and every other place of importance in the
whole nation, who patiently waited the sounds of the bells rung in
unison with the sounds of the strokes upon the spike, transmitted
instantaneously through the intervening space by the electric telegraph.

There is no doubt but that the benefits that have come from the
railways through the increased facilities for transportation and the
corresponding gain to civilization has amply repaid the Government for
all its bounties, notwithstanding some of them were unnecessary, in
fact, a willful waste and led to an orgy of financial and political
corruption a little later.


=The Crédit Mobilier.=--Perhaps the most widely noticed scandal
connected with the railroads was the scheme known as the Crédit
Mobilier. This was made much of by the Grange and other anti-monopoly
movements which reached their height in the ’seventies. Charges having
been made that many congressmen had been bribed by an organization
known as the Crédit Mobilier, a Congressional investigation was
made,[108] Thomas Durant, vice president, and other leading
stockholders of the Union Pacific Railroad, secured a controlling
interest in the stock of the Pennsylvania Fiscal Agency in 1864 and
had its name changed to the Crédit Mobilier of America. One of the
ostensible functions of the company was to loan money for railroad
construction. The same men were instrumental in awarding the contract
for the building of the Union Pacific Railroad to one of their number,
Oakes Ames, a member of the United States House of Representatives,
for stipulated amounts per mile for the different sections ranging
from $42,000 to $96,000, amounting in the aggregate to $47,000,000.
The contract was right away transferred to seven trustees composed of
the same controlling stockholders, who were to execute it receiving
therefor $3000 per year each, and the profits were to be divided among
those stockholders of the Crédit Mobilier of America who would comply
with certain conditions. The Crédit Mobilier agreed to furnish the
necessary money at 7 per cent per annum and 2¹⁄₂ per cent commission,
not to exceed the amount provided in the contract to be paid by the
Union Pacific company. These same leading stockholders of the Union
Pacific being also controlling stockholders of the Crédit Mobilier were
thus, because the contract prices were said to be twice the actual
constructing prices, making a big profit, practically all of which was
coming from the United States treasury. Complaints were being made and
adverse legislation was feared. Stock in Crédit Mobilier was offered
to members of congress at a very low figure on which it is said they
made dividends of 340 per cent. It amounted to this: The men entrusted
with the management of the road let the contract for its construction
to themselves at a figure double its real cost, and pocketed the
profits, estimated at about $30,000,000. These same men started the
scheme, which afterward became common, of watering the stock, that is
increasing the outstanding stock, and distributing it as dividends,
upon the plea that the property had increased without any new outlay of
money. It also appears to be a method of earning dividends upon money
never invested.


=Railroad Consolidation.=--It has been shown that at the beginning
railroad building consisted of short stretches from town to town, or
from the end of one water communication to the beginning of another.
It was but reasonable that these would join for the purpose of through
traffic. The result was also better efficiency as the equipment could
be used to better advantage; the terminal costs were reduced as there
were not so many of them; and, what may have been a leading cause,
the control, and perhaps prevention, of competition. Unrestricted
competition caused rate wars; rates once down it was difficult to get
them back and frequently bankruptcy occurred. Government regulations
were made prohibiting rate agreements and pooling. Such apparently
hastened consolidation. One objection to consolidation was the
concentration of vast financial powers in the hands of a few, and since
money had much influence in Washington and in the state capitals,
political power as well. This and combinations of other industrial
concerns were causes which brought about the enactment of the Sherman
Anti-Trust law of July 2, 1890.[109] This law did not come in time to
stop consolidation and it may be doubtful if it would for the Supreme
Court has decided that combinations are not unlawful unless they
exercise an unreasonable restraint upon trade.[110]

The methods of consolidation are: _merger_ or outright purchase, in
which case the individual lines lose their separate identity; _stock
purchase_, wherein a controlling share of the stock of another road is
held by the purchasing line or by a holding company; _lease_ usually
for long periods, a rental being paid periodically for the use of
the line; and, _community of interest_, that is the establishment of
friendly relations. The consolidations are more often financial than
physical. When two roads physically combine under one management it is
customary to reorganize and assume the same name. In the consolidations
given in the table below many of the roads are operated separately and
almost independently but are dominated by common financial interests
with common policies or very friendly relations. Some of the principal
consolidations prior to 1912 are:[111]

             _Vanderbilt Interests_

                                              Mileage
  Boston & Albany                                392
  New York Central                             3,591
  Lake Shore & Michigan Southern               1,663
  Michigan Central                             1,805
  New York, Chicago & St. L.                     561
  Lake Erie & Western                            886
  Big Four                                     1,979
  Pittsburgh & Lake Erie                         215
  Chicago, Indiana & Southern                    329
  Other affiliated eastern lines               1,759
  Western Maryland[112]                          575
  Chicago & North Western Systems              9,827
                                              ------
      Total                                   23,582

               _Morgan Interests_

  Erie Railroad                                2,565
  Pere Marquette                               2,334
  Southern Railroad System                     8,667
  Cincinnati, New Orleans & Texas Pacific        335
  Mobile & Ohio                                1,114
  Atlantic Coast Line                          6,818
  Louisville & Nashville                       4,590
  Chicago & Great Western                      1,495
                                              ------
      Total                                   27,918
                                              ======

              _Harriman Interests_

  Oregon Short Line                            1,646
  Oregon Railway & Navigation Company          1,737
  Union Pacific System (remainder)             3,791
  Southern Pacific                            10,257
  Illinois Central System                      6,340
  Central of Georgia                           1,915
  Baltimore & Ohio                             4,555
  Delaware & Hudson                              875
  San Pedro, Los Angeles & Salt Lake           1,105
  Cincinnati, Hamilton & Dayton                1,015
                                              ------
      Total                                   33,236
                                              ======

  _Atchison, Topeka and Santa Fé_             10,472

  _Chicago, Milwaukee and
    St. Paul System_                           9,657

  _Seaboard Air Line_                          3,084

          _Pennsylvania Railroad Interests_

  Pennsylvania Lines                          11,197
  Norfolk & Western                            1,990
                                              ------
      Total                                   13,187
                                              ======

                  _Gould Interests_

  Wabash System                                2,663
  Wheeling & Lake Erie                           457
  Missouri Pacific System[113]                 3,920
  St. Louis, Iron Mountain & Southern[113]       313
  St. Louis, Southwestern[113]                 1,675
  Texas & Pacific[113]                         1,991
  International & Great Northern[113]          1,159
  Denver & Rio Grande[114]                     2,778
  Western Pacific[113]                           979
                                              ------
      Total                                   15,935

                  _Moore Interests_

  Rock Island System                           8,144
  Delaware, Lackawanna & Western[114]          1,052
  Lehigh Valley[115]                           1,431
                                              ------
      Total                                   10,627
                                              ======

                  _Hill Interests_

  Great Northern                               7,397
  Northern Pacific                             6,281
  Chicago, Burlington & Quincy                10,443
  Colorado & Southern                          1,249
                                              ------
      Total                                   25,370
                                              ======

                _New Haven Interests_

  New York, New Haven & Hartford               2,887
  Boston & Maine                               3,594
                                              ------
      Total                                    6,481

                 _Hawley Interests_

  Minneapolis & St. Louis                      1,027
  Iowa Central                                   559
  Toledo, St. Louis & Western                    451
  ’Frisco System                               7,147
  Chicago & Alton                              1,025
  Chesapeake & Ohio System                     2,232
  Missouri, Kansas & Texas                     3,393
  Hocking Valley                                 350
                                              ------
      Total                                   16,508
                                              ======

  _Philadelphia and Reading_                   2,137

  Grand Total of above Groups and Systems    198,638
  Total milage of railways in the United
  States, Dec. 31, 1916                      397,014

  For a more extended discussion see “National Consolidation of
  Railroads,” by George H. Lewis.


=Mechanical Development.=--There is not space to follow in detail
the mechanical development of railroads. The rail, for instance, was
at first a mere plank placed in the cart track to prevent rutting;
this evolved into a rail of timber about 4 x 6 inches held in proper
position by cross-ties not to be considered as sleepers or supports
especially. On top of the rail was later placed a strap iron. Since
this strap iron under the wheel loads curled up, thicker plates began
to be used. Then cast-iron rails some 4 or 5 feet long from tie to tie,
cast deeper at the middle for greater strength. Then the rolling mills
were becoming sufficiently improved to roll out wrought-iron rails, at
first rectangular plates, then T-rails held up by chairs and finally
through a dozen or more forms to Bessemer, then open-hearth steel rail
shapes as at present used. The fastenings and fish plates have gone
through a stage of evolution. The track soon assumed a standard form
and has retained it with little variation notwithstanding attempts to
use steel and concrete ties.

The freight cars, at first boxes with wheels on them, have gradually
developed into monsters of steel with draw bars, automatic brakes and
couplings. Passenger cars at first very variable were developed from
stage coaches and Conestoga wagons hitched together. In Europe they
remained short, like stage coaches with side doors. In the United
States they lengthened out with seats through the interior and doors
and platforms at the ends. Platforms were eventually housed in with
vestibules. Both types have their advantages and disadvantages.
Sleeping cars seem to be a development of the canal and steamboat
sleeping quarters. Here a single company early obtaining a working, if
not a legal, monopoly of the business of making and operating sleepers.
As a result no improvements of note have appeared in them for years.
For financial efficiency the monopoly seems to be a good thing; for
mechanical progress it is not.

Locomotives have shown a continual progress. One reason perhaps is
their short lives; new ones must always be coming along and there is
ample opportunity for experimentation. From the _Tom Thumb_ to the
powerful Mountain Type is a long climb, but as each step was taken the
individual changes were not very noticeable. Like the hour-hand of a
watch only by observing its position at times quite separated can it be
noticed to have traveled.

In fact the entire railway system with its millions of cars operating
on hundreds of roads has grown complex and yet standardized. To get a
common gauge that cars from one road might pass to another required an
act of Congress. At first companies adopted diverse gauges that their
cars could not go onto another road, but when transcontinental roads
were to be built and through lines of traffic established President
Lincoln was called upon to set a gauge. He “side-tracked” the matter
and threw it onto Congress, who established the distance 4 feet 8¹⁄₂
inches as the standard width between rails.

Without the telegraph the present amplification of railroad business
could not have taken place. The early trains traveled by time schedule.
No extra train could be added, although looking-posts were established
at the stations up which the train men could climb to watch for the
smoke of an approaching train. Now every division point must have its
coterie of dependable dispatchers. Each wire carries multiple messages.
Electric signals and other safety devices to lessen accidents are
universal, while the bewildering network of tracks in the ordinary city
yard are operated easily from distant towers by interlocking switches.
That railroads have brought about an industrial and social revolution,
that they have increased enormously the country’s transportation,
that they have thus been very instrumental in bringing the present
civilization to its high and uniform state of attainment, cannot be
denied.

[Illustration:

  © _Underwood and Underwood_

MODERN LOCOMOTIVES

1. Showing the Growth in the Size of Locomotives During the Past Twenty
Years. The Smaller Locomotive is an _American_ Type Class Engine of
1900. The Larger is a _Mountain Type_ Engine. Both are Used on the C.
B. & Q. R. R. Photographed at Lincoln, Nebr., Sept., 1922. 2. One of
the New Gearless _Electric_ Locomotives Built by the General Electric
Company for the C. M. & St. Paul R. R.]


=The Evolution of the Sleeping Car.=--Mr. Husband has made a very
interesting book of the story of the Pullman car and its evolution[116]
in which he traces with much detail, step by step, the improvements
from 1836, when the first sleeping car was offered to the traveling
public, to the most modern parlor car now in use. The discomfort and
inconvenience of travelers by rail was so much greater than that by
canal that only the greater speed of the former caused it to forge
ahead of the latter. As the mileage of the roads increased so also did
the comforts of travel. It has already been noted that sparks set fire
to the clothing of passengers. Soon box-like cars replaced the open
carriages and bogie trucks replaced the rigid wheels, the former giving
much more protection and the latter comfort while rounding curves. But
yet passengers were herded like cattle on stiff-backed narrow benches
in cars with scant head clearance and width. Clean stone ballast for
the road bed had not yet been thought of and the dust blew in clouds
through the open windows in the summer time, and a stove vitiated the
air in the winter. There were no screens or vestibules. It is a far
cry from the dim flaring candle to the brilliant white incandescent
electric lights. Passenger cars were rapidly improved until by 1844
they had taken on something of the appearance of the present coach.

George M. Pullman, a Chicago contractor, having experienced the
inconveniences of railway travel and also being acquainted from close
association with the Erie Canal and the sleeping arrangements of
the canal boats, had visions of similar or better rail comforts. In
1858 he engaged Leonard Seibert, an employee of the Chicago & Alton
Railroad, to remodel two coaches into the first Pullman sleeping cars.
Mr. Pullman’s invention of upper berth construction whereby it could
be closed during the day and serve as a receptacle for bedding was
introduced into these cars, before which time sleeping car bunks had
been stationary and on one side only. The success of his venture was
such that he established a shop for the manufacture of the cars and
employed technical skill to plan and make them. He had such organizing
ability, however, that before his death he saw the Pullman Company
holding a practical monopoly of all the sleeping cars in the country,
with through cars scheduled so that change of Pullman was unnecessary
from coast to coast, or if a change had to be made it was merely a
transfer from one car to a connecting car on another route. A single
ticket will carry a passenger from Portland, Maine, to San Francisco,
by way of Washington, D.C., New Orleans and Los Angeles with only two
changes of cars, namely, at New York and Washington, a total distance
of 4,199 miles.

It may be interesting to note that some 26,000,000 persons are annually
accommodated by the 7500 cars operated by this company.


=Street Car Service.=--Now that more than one half the population
of the United States live in cities makes the matter of local
transportation of at least passing interest. Railroads were at first
tram cars and many of them were built through the city streets, it
was easy, therefore, to make of them street cars caring for such
local traffic as desired to take advantage of them. They became a
popular means of local transportation in the decade 1850-60. As the
demand became greater the one-horse car gave way to the two-horse
with its longer body and greater capacity. These not being sufficient
steam locomotives were used in some cities, in others the tracks were
elevated above the surface, the first in New York in 1876, or depressed
below with steam locomotives operating trains of cars rapidly loaded
and unloaded at stopping points about four blocks apart. In 1879
or 1880 in San Francisco where the hills were too steep for horses
the cable car was designed, whereby an endless cable operated from
a central station ran continuously in a trench or conduit under the
track. A grip attached to the car could be made to take hold of this
cable and the car was thus drawn along. Notwithstanding they were
expensive to install cable cars were rapidly replacing horse-drawn cars
when electric traction came in and displaced them.


=Electric Traction.=--There are reports of attempts to obtain magnetic
traction by the use of batteries, but not until the electric dynamo
and motor had become practical working machines was anything like a
successful working electrically propelled car developed. The ordinary
method is to generate the electricity at a central station, carry
it along the track by means of a wire, from which it is taken by a
trolley or some form of conductor to a motor on the car completing
the circuit through the track and ground. Such a car was practically
demonstrated at the Berlin Exposition of 1879, by Werner Siemens, with
a line 219 yards long.[117] This was the first practical electric
railway. But long before this time in America experiments had been
made with electric traction. Dever exhibited a model at Springfield,
Massachusetts, in 1835.[118] In 1879, the year of Siemens’ exhibition,
another model railway having a “third rail” to carry the current was
exhibited at Stockbridge, Massachusetts. Edison had a car in operation
at Menlo Park, New Jersey, in 1882, and the following year a small
road carried passengers at an exhibit in Chicago. Miniature roads were
exhibited at Philadelphia, Denver, Cleveland, New Orleans, and possibly
elsewhere. The first electric railway built and operated for profit
in American streets was at Richmond, Virginia, in 1885 on 2¹⁄₂ miles
of track. During the same year 2 miles between Baltimore and Hampton
were put in operation.[119] By 1890 the number of cities having trolley
cars had increased to forty-nine.[120] From that time on the change
from horse-drawn cars was very rapid. Trolley lines were even extended
throughout the country districts. At one time it looked as though they
might replace steam cars for passenger traffic, especially short-haul
traffic. There was a complete network of interurban trolley lines in
the Eastern and Central Western states by 1910.[121] The trolley is
also being used upon hard-surfaced roads without tracks by buses and
trucks. Steam railroads running into New York City through the tubes
use electric locomotives to draw the trains, thus avoiding the smoke
nuisance and the danger therewith connected. The Milwaukee Railroad
is using electric locomotives on its mountain division in Montana and
Idaho. Electricity is generated by water power; also the trains going
down grade are run against a dynamo and storage battery thus acting as
a brake as well as renewing the batteries.


SELECTED REFERENCES

  BROWN, WILLIAM H., “History of the First Locomotive in America.” D.
  Appleton & Co., New York, 1871.

  BURCH, EDWARD P., “Electric Traction for Railway Trains,” Chap. I
  (Historical). McGraw-Hill Book Co., New York, 1911.

  CALLENDER, GUY S., “The Economic History of the United States,”
  Chapter VIII, “Transportation,” Ginn & Co., New York.

  Census, U. S. Eleventh (1890) “Transportation on Land.”

  Census Bureau, U. S. Special Report (1902) “Streets and Electric
  Railways.”

  DAVIS, JOHN P., “Union Pacific Railway.” S. C. Griggs & Co., Chicago.

  DONALDSON, THOMAS, “History of the Public Domain,” Published by order
  of an act of Congress, 1884.

  DUNBAR, SEYMOUR, “A History of Travel in America,” 4 volumes.
  Bobbs-Merrill Company, Indianapolis.

  ERICSSON, JOHN, “Life of” by William C. Church, Chap. IV. Charles
  Scribner’s Sons, New York.

  HUSBAND, JOSEPH, “The Story of the Pullman Car.” A. C. McClurg &
  Company, Chicago, 1917.

  JOHNSON, EMORY R., “Elements of Transportation,” 1909. D. Appleton &
  Company, New York.

  LARRABEE, WM., “The Railroad Question,” Shulte Publishing Company,
  Chicago, 1893.

  LE ROSSIGNOL, J. E., “Monopolies Past and Present.” T. Y. Crowell
  Company, New York.

  LEWIS, GEORGE H., “National Consolidation of Railroads.” Dodd, Mead &
  Co., New York.

  Maps of Interurban Lines, Century Atlas. Century Company, New York.

  MARTIN, E. W., “History of the Grange Movement, or The Farmer’s War
  against Monopoly.” A subscription book published in 1874. National
  Publishing Company, Chicago.

  POORE, HENRY V., “History of Railroads and Canals of the United
  States,” Vol. I, p. 377. New York, 1860.

  SANBORN, JOHN B., “Congressional Grants of Land in Aid of Railways.”
  University of Wisconsin Bulletin, Vol. II, No. 3, Econ. pol. Sci. and
  Hist. Series.

  SELFRIDGE, H. GORDON, “The Romance of Commerce.” John Lane, London.

  SPARKS, E. E., “National Development,” Vol. XXIII, The American
  Nation Series, Chapter III and IV. Harper & Brothers, New York.

  U. S. Statutes, 1862-1864, Pacific Railway Acts, Investigation of the
  Crédit Mobilier.

  U. S. Statutes, 41st Congress, 1st Session, Chap. DCXLVII, Sherman
  Anti-Trust Law.

  U. S. Statutes, Railroad Bills, 1850-1880 House Report 42d Cong., 3d
  Session, No. 77.


FOOTNOTES

  [87] Quoted from “Niles’ Register” of 1812 by Dunbar.

  [88] Stevens’ pamphlet published in 1812.

  [89] Stephenson’s first locomotive was put out in 1814. His _Rocket_
  and Ericsson’s _Novelty_ had their famous contest resulting in favor
  of the _Rocket_ in 1829.

  [90] Brown’s “History of the First Locomotive,” letter from Cooper,
  1869.

  [91] The coning of wheels is an invention of Jonathan Knight,
  Engineer of the Baltimore & Ohio Railroad Company.

  [92] Dunbar, “A History of Travel in America,” 932.

  [93] Dunbar, “A History of Travel in America,” 960.

  [94] The _Albany Argus_, August 11, 1831.

  [95] “History of the Railroads and Canals of the United States,”
  1860, Vol. I, p. 377.

  [96] Dunbar, “A History of Travel in America,” 998, 1383.

  [97] Dunbar, “A History of Travel in America,” 1071.

  [98] _Potter’s American Monthly_, July, 1879.

  [99] T. C. Smith, _American Nation_, Vol. XVIII, p. 60.

  [100] E. W. Martin, “History of the Grange Movement,” 1874, p. 35.

  [101] Donaldson, “History of the Public Domain.” University of
  Wisconsin Bulletin: “Congressional Grants of Land in Aid of
  Railways,” by J. B. Sanborn, Pol. Sci. and History Series, Vol. II,
  No. 3.

  [102] The “History of the Grange Movement,” a subscription book by
  Edward Winslow Martin, published in 1874, but which can hardly be
  taken as wholly reliable, says: “The lands granted by the Government
  to various railway corporations make up a total area of 198,165,794
  acres, or about 300,000 square miles--an area larger than the State
  of Texas, which contains 237,504 square miles ... and the railway
  subsidies comprise nearly one-tenth of the entire Union.”

  [103] Dunbar, “A History of Travel in America,” Chap. LVI, et seq.
  Donaldson, “History of the Public Domain.”

  [104] Senate Executive Document No. 78, 33d Congress, 2d Session.

  [105] U. S. Statutes. Acts of 1862 and 1864.

  [106] By subsequent provision the right of way was cut to two hundred
  feet, although the company still holds four hundred feet through
  parts of Nebraska.

  [107] Thomas Donaldson’s “History of the Public Domain.”

  [108] “House Reports,” 42 Cong., 3d Session, No. 77.

  [109] U. S. Statutes, 51 Cong., 1 Sess., Chap. DCXLVII.

  [110] Digest U. S. Supreme Court Reports, Vol. IV, “Monopoly,” pp.
  4043-4052, The Lawyers Co-operative Publishing Company, Rochester, N.
  Y., 1908.

  [111] Funk and Wagnalls’ Encyclopedia.

  [112] Jointly with Gould Interests.

  [113] Jointly with Rockefeller, Kuhn, Loeb, & Co., Vanderbilt and
  other interests.

  [114] Jointly with Standard Oil interests.

  [115] Jointly with Erie, Reading and Vanderbilt interests.

  [116] “The Story of the Pullman Car,” by Joseph Husband. A. C.
  McClurg & Company, Chicago, 1917. Cf. _Literary Digest_, February 10,
  1923, p. 25.

  [117] Funk and Wagnalls’ Encyclop.

  [118] “Special Reports, Streets and Electric Railways,” U. S. Census
  Bureau (1902). This, of course, was not a practical machine.

  [119] “American Nation,” Vol. XXIII, 39.

  [120] U. S. Eleventh Census (1890), “Transportation on Land.”

  [121] See Maps in Century Dictionary.




CHAPTER V

THE MODERN WAGON ROAD


Gone are the long picturesque lines of emigrant and freight wagons,
with their conestogas, their stage coaches, their oxen, their mules
and horses; gone are the hospitable inns with their gay and social
crowds of happy travelers; gone are the nightly wagon-formed corrals
into which the freighter was wont to drive his animals to prevent their
stampeding by the wily red-skin; gone are the complacent but slow-going
canal barges so plentiful and popular that at the cry of “low bridge,”
everybody ducked by reflex action; gone are the floating palaces on
the vacillating and changeable waters of the interior river systems;
these yesteryear implements of transportation have been all but
superseded by more powerful or more speedy instruments. The canals are
very frequently but weed-grown scum-covered channels through the soil,
while many of the wagon roads are similarly weed-grown or dust-covered
lanes on top of the soil. Perhaps a rejuvenation will come. Already
the public road shows signs of a more vigorous growth than the world
has ever witnessed even in the heyday of road building under the Roman
Caesars.

[Illustration:

  © _Underwood and Underwood_

TRANSPORTATION ACROSS DEATH VALLEY

A Picturesque Method of Earlier Days.]

Public highways began their desuetude (partial at least) about 1830,
at the advent of the steam railway. To be sure, arrangements were
made for the laying out and care of roads. There were, also, usually
poll and property taxes levied for road and bridge purposes. But
generally the old English custom of allowing such taxes to be worked
out prevailed. In Iowa, for instance,[122] the county court was given
“general supervision over the highways” which must be 66 feet wide
unless otherwise specially directed. The manner of establishing roads
is set forth and the county judge may if he wishes call in a competent
surveyor and “cause the line of the road to be accurately surveyed and
plainly marked out.” “Where crops have been sowed or planted before the
road is finally established the opening thereof shall be delayed until
the crop is harvested.” The county supervisor must appoint a deputy
in each township, but the deputy “must regard himself as an actual
laboring hand” and his compensation “shall not exceed one dollar and
fifty cents for each day actually employed.” It is the duty of the
supervisor “to place and preserve the roads in as good a condition as
the funds at his disposal will permit, and to place guide boards at
such points as he may think expedient or as the court may direct.” In
the Eastern states and in the hilly districts the method of locating
each individual road to follow a trail or stream or ridge usually
prevailed, but in many of the prairie states roads were located by law
on each section line and in some states on each half-section line as
well. This made every man’s farm adjacent to a road, although it was
certainly a waste of land. In nearly all the prairie states the legal
right of way is now 66 feet,[123] in other states it is made 49¹⁄₂
and 33 feet. Massachusetts state-aid roads have a minimum of 50 feet.
Texas divided her roads into three classes with widths of 60, 30 and
20 feet. New Jersey has some state roads 33 feet wide. On the whole 66
feet seems to be favored. This, if roads are made on every half-section
mile, appropriates almost 5 per cent of the land, a quantity that
by proper selection and location might be materially reduced. The
section line method is liked by farmers because it leaves the fields
rectangular, a convenient form for efficiency in cultivation.


=The Influence of the Bicycle on Roads.=--Road construction remained in
a lackadaisical state with here and there a spurt, with now and then
an intelligent supervisor who appreciated the need of better wagon
roads, until the coming of the bicycle. That machine may be considered
a descendant of the old celeripede, which consisted of two wheels
connected by a horizontal bar on which the rider sat and propelled
himself by pushing with his feet alternately on the ground, through
the velocipede, which had the front wheel pivoted to the framework for
easy steering. The attachment of pedals is credited to a Scotchman,
Kirkpatrick Macmillan, about 1840, who applied them to the rear wheel.
In 1886 Lallement in the United States and Michaux in France, placed
the pedals on the front wheels. The front wheel was gradually increased
in diameter until in the ’eighties it sometimes measured as much as 60
inches. The rear wheel decreased as the front increased. The stability
of the wheel was not very great; headers were common, and mounting
was difficult. To overcome these defects of the “ordinary” there was
developed, 1885, the “safety,” approximately the present bicycle,
in which the pedals are carried on a separate shaft and the power
transmitted by chain and sprocket to the rear wheel. With the invention
of the Dunlop[124] pneumatic tire, and consequent overcoming of much of
the jolting so objectionable in more solid tires, the adoption of the
bicycle as a means of pleasure and business locomotion was extremely
rapid. The cycling boom reached its height about 1896 or 1897, by which
time a great many large manufactories of bicycles had been established
over the country. A frenzy seized upon the people and men and women of
all stations were riding wheels; ardent cyclists were found in every
city, village, and hamlet.

As a result of the cycling craze there were organized numerous “wheel
clubs” and finally a national one known as the League of American
Wheelmen, organized about 1887. Its object partly social and partly to
popularize the new sport of cycling, became a few years later almost
wholly a form of propaganda for “better roads.” Newspaper space was
freely utilized; many papers making special and regular features of
“good roads”; pamphlets were published and distributed broadly, and a
magazine was established.[125]

At first the wheelmen were met by the cry of selfishness, with the
argument that the city folk wanted the farmers to build good roads
for their pleasure; but men of foresight, men of affairs, saw the
benefits accruing to all kinds of business and added their influence.
Mr. Potter, a lawyer of New York City, who had graduated in civil
engineering at Cornell University before turning to the law, became
interested in the good roads movement, studied and made himself one of
the best posted men on roads in the United States. When the League of
American Wheelmen decided to start a magazine he was selected for its
editor and manager. Under his direction the subscription list of _Good
Roads_ soon reached more than 30,000.[126] “The articles strive to
show the value of roads in a commercial sense and by a comparison with
other countries demonstrate how far behind America is in this respect.”
Pictures of good and bad roads were used freely, thus holding the
attention where reading matter alone would have failed. European roads,
the French especially, were described and played up through newspapers
generally. Scarcely a journal that did not run leaders and other
articles on the benefits of good roads and methods of building and
maintaining the same. Our ordinary roads were decried on every hand. A
lady voices her opinion thus:[127]

  I came to this country with the best prejudices, having enjoyed
  the privilege of meeting with some of its noblest representatives
  in my fatherland. I admired much the individual independence, the
  high standing of women, the gentle sway of the church, the liberal
  education of the children, and the unsurpassed charity that extends
  even to distant countries. I must confess that I was struck with
  the bad roads everywhere, in cities as well as in the country, and
  at the same time, amused at the compensation one gets when one meets
  with an accident. Why not spend the money in the improvements of the
  roads--make these roads perfect, and then let everybody look out for
  himself.

  In summer the worst road is good; but in winter schools have to
  be closed, the children are stopped in their regular pursuits,
  learning becomes desultory, and the strong feeling of duty that
  has to be developed from the very beginning of life by strict good
  habits gets slackened and slighted; and so also the attendance of
  the churches--for many people the only comfort in the struggle for
  existence--becomes an impossibility. And especially the painstaking
  farmer must find it hard to drive his team through the muddy, clayey
  road, in bringing the fruits of his labor to the market. I hear him,
  with many a suppressed oath on everything under the sun, dragging his
  cartload through the mud and standing pools, and in snowstorms he is
  sometimes totally lost. All communication stops.

And so on for a column or more. She inserts by way of anecdote which
shows that two of the greatest Germans who ever lived did not think the
lowly road too insignificant to discuss:

  When Heinrich Heine for the first time met with the royal poet,
  Goethe, he was so impressed with the majesty of his personality that
  he could speak of nothing less than the plum trees on the chaussée,
  between Jena and Weimar.

Also Bill Nye, the humorist, takes a rap at the roads in this
manner.[128]

  Our wagon roads throughout the country are generally a disgrace to
  civilization and before we undertake to supply Jaeger underwear and
  sealskin covered bibles with flexible backs to the African it might
  be well to put a few dollars into the relief of galled and broken
  down horses that have lost their breath on our miserable highways.

  The country system, as I recall it, was in my boyhood about as poor
  and inefficient as it could well be. Each township was divided up
  into road districts, and each road district was presided over by an
  overseer of highways, whose duty it is to collect so many days’ work
  or so many dollars from each taxpayer in the district. Of course no
  taxpayer would pay a dollar when he could come and make mud pies on
  the road all day and visit and gossip with the neighbors and save his
  dollar too.

  The result seemed to be that the work was misdirected and generally
  an injury to the road. With all our respect to the farmer, I will
  state right here that he does not know how to make roads. An all
  wise Providence never intended that he should know. The professional
  roadbuilder, with the money used by the ignorant sapheads and
  self-made road architects, would in a few years make roads in the
  United States over which two or three times the present sized load
  could be easily drawn, and the dumb beasts of the Republic would rise
  up and call us blessed for doing it.

This bit of doggerel appeared in _Good Roads_ about the same time:

_They May Be Sinking Yet_

    Old farmer John drove off to town
      All on a rainy day.
    The glistening highway up and down,
      With mire shone all the way.

    The gentle weeping raindrops fell
      And had fallen all the night;
    The bottom of that highway--well;
      ’Twas literally out of sight.

    But John had hitched his sturdy steeds.
      His sturdy steeds and true
    That often ’mid such urgent needs.
      Had boldly struggled through.

    And John had sworn a big round oath
      With deep and bated breath,
    He’d rather brave the deep, forsooth,
      Thrice o’er than starve to death.

    For visions of the flour bin,
      ’Twas empty he could see,
    And for a week no sugar in
      His coffee cup had he.

    And so amid the sea of mire.
      Those steeds right valiant reel,
    While turbid waves creep higher, higher,
      Upon the wagon wheel.

    Oh! help ye p